 For many entrepreneurs starting a business begins with the desire to control their destiny and an idea that they believe can fulfill an unmet need in the marketplace. Invariably the first step is to develop a business plan including growth prospects and development costs that will attract investors with the necessary capital needed for expansion. Further down the line there may be an initial public offering IPO or a merger and acquisition M A . As it happens the current pool of capital available to startups may be larger and more diverse than ever before. The 2016 Bank of America Private Bank Insights on Wealth and Worth survey found that more than one third of business owners used their own or their family s savings almost one fifth used a personal or business credit card and nearly a quarter took advantage of a loan from a bank or financial institution. About 6 took advantage of the recent trend of crowd funding small contributions typically made online by multiple contributors and close to one in 10 accepted funding from venture capital VC firms1. Compassionate Eye Foundation Steven Errico Getty Images Radius Images offset Bjorn Vinter Getty Images. Consequences of Capital It s important to understand the possible consequences of accepting or not accepting outside funding methods like the following BOOTSTRAP If you delay accepting third party capital you can call the shots and drive your plan forward. Yet this kind of extended bootstrapping may limit the expansion potential for your product or client base. VENTURE CAPITAL If you plan to obtain venture capital be sure to perform due diligence on the prospective firms. Determine how much control they seek versus the contribution they are willing to make while also assessing the kinds of introductions and connections they may be able to provide. IPO or M A While many companies are waiting to go public due to the availability of capital doing so can raise a number of concerns keeping employees engaged and staying above water in the event of a funding downturn for example. Photograph courtesy of Bank of America As it happens the current pool of available capital may be larger and more diverse than ever before. Karen Reynolds Sharkey Passion and Practicality Entrepreneurship can provide a person the opportunity to pursue something that they are passionate about but just as vital as that passion is the grasp and understanding of the practical aspects considerations of capital raising and liquidity during the growth cycle for example of running a company. Making informed decisions can help develop the product or service into a market leader rather than letting it languish as a great idea with inadequate funding. Consult with your advisor to understand what funding approach makes the most sense given your circumstances. START UP Idea Create a business plan Research proposed business and competitive environment Forecast startup costs Interview attorneys bankers CPAs and consultants Formation Decide on an ownership structure Determine form of business corporation partnership LLC Engage with professional advisors and leverage their areas of expertise Register and file organizational documents Determine tax status Choose a work location Set up a payroll and accounting plan Obtain state and local business permits Employees Build your initial team Personal Draft individual estate planning documents e.g. will business power of attorney Consider wealth transfer techniques Seed Budgeting Cash flow projections Banking Working capital accounts Emergency savings accounts Funding Sources Friends and family Crowd funding Seed money Personal line of credit GROWTH Survival Business Focus Handling increased sales and customers Banking Treasury management accounts Card solutions Working line of credit Employees Recruiting new employees Compensation and benefit plans Funding Sources Angel investors Venture capital Debt financing Expansion Business Focus Finding new revenue channels Adding new products services or geography to existing markets Management Issues Having the right management to handle growth and expansion Potential mergers or acquisitions Banking Equipment leasing Commercial real estate financing Acquisition financing Funding Sources Later stage venture funding Debt financing Harvest Business Focus Product or service improvement Management Issues Structure a business succession plan Insurance for certain employees Update business continuity POA buy sell Preserving business culture Employees Focus on retention of key employees Structuring equity deferred compensation for key employees Personal Continue wealth transfer planning grantor retained annuity trust or GRAT donor advised funds LEARN MORE ABOUT BUSINESS OWNERS EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 1 2016 Bank of America Private Bank Insights on Wealth and Worth latest data available . 