 Today s collectors are finding value in art that goes beyond aesthetics. The 2018 U.S. Trust Insights on Wealth and Worth survey found that these financially driven collectors are increasingly incorporating art into their long term wealth plans and more actively buying selling gifting lending and donating pieces from their collections. However there is still opportunity for collectors to incorporate art into their overall financial strategy since many collectors have not yet had meaningful conversations with an advisor about integrating art into their plans. Collectors Today The globalization of the art world has attracted a new breed of younger more diverse collectors. While Baby Boomers and older generations still make up the majority 53 of collectors Millennials are the fastest growing segment with ownership among all Millennials rising to 36 up 8 from last year. Aesthetic value continues to be the primary reason for collecting across age groups 62 agree but younger collectors tend to be more financially driven. In fact a third of Millennial collectors see art as a key component to be leveraged to build greater wealth which is twice as much as other collectors 33 compared to 16 of all collectors see Figure 1 . In addition to generational changes the art world is also seeing gender shifts in its collector base. Whereas men have largely dominated the traditional art world women are now a rising presence. Today 1 in 3 high net worth women either owns or is interested in collecting art. Even though the majority of current collectors are men 64 men to 36 women women are demonstrating a slightly higher interest than men in collecting. Market Dynamics Survey results reveal an active market with expected increases in both acquisitions and sales. In fact more than three quarters of art collectors anticipate making a purchase in the next year 78 including nearly all 97 of Millennial collectors 87 of Gen X collectors and 64 of Baby Boomers see Figure 2 . And while just 41 of Gen Xers and 24 of Boomers plan to sell this year 85 of Millennials plan to sell their art in the next year indicating that younger collectors tend to be more dynamic selling works as they build their collections. This also suggests that the market may see increasing turnover going forward. Additionally the survey shows a rapid growth in online acquisitions. Over the past year 43 more collectors bought art online compared to the year prior. And while about three quarters 78 of Millennial collectors have bought art online in the past year compared to one fourth of Baby Boomers the biggest growth in online acquisitions was driven by women 16 in 2017 to 36 in 2018 . Charitable Strategies Today collectors are also increasingly creating estate planning and legacy opportunities through gifting lending and donating. In the next year about half of all collectors plan to gift a work of art 46 and nearly half intend to loan 46 . Furthermore while 37 of collectors have gifted or passed art on to family members in the past half 50 plan to do so in the future see Figure 3 . Plans to gift or loan fine art generally follow the same patterns as buying and selling with younger collectors citing the most active plans in this area. Collectors may be considering these avenues for potential tax benefits and as part of a charitable giving strategy related to their collections. In fact 30 of collectors plan to donate one or more pieces to nonprofit arts organizations while 21 plan to donate to other nonprofits transactions that would likely have tax implications. Overall 19 of collectors are thinking strategically about how to reduce taxes up from 12 last year. Building Wealth As the art market expands and prices rise more collectors are incorporating tangible assets like art into their long term wealth plans. Historically the vast majority of collectors have not considered art to be part of their wealth planning strategy but today that is changing. Up from 29 a year ago nearly half 42 of all collectors including 72 of Millennial collectors now incorporate art into their wealth structuring and planning see Figure 4 . This more financially driven collector base is also driving an expansion of art secured lending. Today more individuals are using their collections to unlock capital to redeploy into other areas of their financial life like real estate a private company or even to fund the purchase of more art. In fact 23 of collectors have accessed capital by borrowing against existing art as collateral and another 20 say they have plans to do so. Similarly 21 of collectors have used their art as collateral for a loan to acquire new art up from 7 just a year ago. Despite increasing recognition of art as a key component for building wealth there is still a significant opportunity for collectors to consider it in their overall financial plan. Today only 21 of current collectors and 18 of those interested in collecting are talking with a financial advisor about integrating art into their long term wealth strategy. 