 CLIENT PROFILE Bank of America Private Bank s client a well regarded contemporary art museum in the Midwest was faced with complex challenges as it sought to strengthen the institution s financial footing. The museum needed to find a better way to manage its finances and its endowment investments and had to greatly improve how its Investment Committee functioned. APPROACH Although it has no permanent collection the museum had garnered national acclaim for its acumen in exhibiting new artists. As the institution s program had matured it was clear that it needed to rethink how it managed its finances. Its Investment Committee was not functioning effectively and the approach to endowment management was not optimal. Thanks to an existing client relationship with a board member a Bank of America Private Bank Philanthropic strategist was introduced to the director who appreciated Bank of America s stalwart support of the arts. Bank of America Private Bank learned that the Investment Committee had been focused on debating tactical decisions such as which specific funds to invest in and that some committee members had disproportionate influence on manager selection. The chief financial officer position was also not structured to handle the museum s increasingly complex financial needs. The museum s Investment Committee invited Bank of America Private Bank to pitch for the investment management accounts. After winning the business Bank of America Private Bank consulted on the Investment Committee structure and governance practices as well as the investment portfolio but the scope of assistance soon broadened. Impressed with Bank of America Private Bank s initial ideas the director asked the team for a full range of recommendations to improve the institution s fundraising and donor development strategy. SOLUTIONS The museum engaged Bank of America Private Bank as an Outsourced Chief Investment Officer OCIO which would act as a co fiduciary and assist with investment decisions with guidance from the Investment Committee. Bank of America Private Bank also educated committee members around roles and responsibilities and best practices allowing the committee to focus on shaping an overall investment strategy outlining policy and risk characteristics. The museum empowered its Chief Financial Officer and leadership and development teams to gain clarity about their fundraising effectiveness through a rigorous analysis of return on investment and systematic expense management. RESULTS By working with the Bank of America Private Bank team of Philanthropic strategists our client is Benefiting from an OCIO model for portfolio management which has freed its Investment Committee to serve as a sounding board and focus its attention on governance. Achieving competitive portfolio performance with 6 endowment returns while accommodating existing alternative investments and mission aligned values. Embracing a strategic planning process that is leading to more structured transparent decisions about how money is raised and spent resulting in a $400 000 year over year increase in donations. THE POWER TO imagine illuminate and inspire At Bank of America we believe in the power of the arts to help economies thrive educate and enrich societies and create greater cultural understanding. That s why we are a leader in helping the arts flourish across the globe supporting more than 2 000 nonprofit cultural institutions each year. Our arts support is wide ranging. We believe the neighborhood playhouse can be as important as the world class museum or orchestra in its value to the community in the lives of its citizens and in the education of its young people. A key component of our arts program is to help nonprofit institutions illuminate varied cultural traditions and to help the arts sector create pathways for more diverse employment and engagement. The Bank of America Art Program is part of the company s commitment to grow responsibly while bringing value to economies society and the communities we serve. To learn more about our arts support please visit bankofamerica.com arts. MANAGING YOUR WORTH WITH BANK OF AMERICA PRIVATE BANK Your wealth is not measured by numbers alone but by the extraordinary opportunities and complex challenges that define your life. At Bank of America Private Bank we apply our deep insight and broad expertise to help you make the most of the things that matter most to you. We begin by listening to you learning about your life and working with you to understand your priorities. Your advisor and your team of specialists then build a wealth plan that aligns with your personal values and family goals. Whether we are managing your portfolio serving as trustee or administering an estate our focus is what best meets your objectives. Together we develop personalized solutions that address the dimensions of your worth today and the legacy you re building for future generations. LEARN MORE ABOUT ART SERVICES EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS This publication is designed to provide general information about ideas and strategies. It is for discussion purposes only since the availability and effectiveness of any strategy are dependent upon your client s individual facts and circumstances. All asset allocation recommendations must be considered in the context of an individual investor s goals time horizon liquidity needs and risk tolerance. Not all recommendations will be suitable for all investors. Please remind your clients to always consult with their independent attorney tax advisor investment manager and insurance agent for final recommendations and before changing or implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. The case studies presented are hypothetical and do not reflect specific strategies we may have developed for actual clients. They are for illustrative purposes only and intended to demonstrate the capabilities of Bank of America Private Bank and or Bank of America. They are not intended to serve as investment advice since the availability and effectiveness of any strategy is dependent upon your individual facts and circumstances. Results will vary and no suggestion is made about how any specific solution or strategy performed in reality. Always consult with your independent attorney tax advisor investment manager and insurance agent for final recommendations and before changing or implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. Keep in mind this asset class may not be appropriate for all investors and can be a component of an overall investment strategy. Leveraging art involves risks including lack of liquidity and yield production and may restrict some movement and lending of the artwork. If default sale of the collateral could result in distressed circumstances. Credit facilities are provided by Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC its subsidiaries or other bank subsidiaries of Bank of America Corporation each an Equal Opportunity Lender. All loans and collateral are subject to credit approval and may require the filing of financing statements or other lien notices in public records. Asset based financing involves special risks and is not for everyone. When considering an asset based loan consideration should be given to individual requirements asset portfolio composition and risk tolerance as well as capital gains portfolio performance expectations and investment time horizon. A complete description of the loan terms will be found in the individual credit facility documentation and agreements. Clients should consult with their own independent tax and legal advisors. Diversification does not ensure a profit or protect against loss in declining markets. 