 To help you pursue your commercial real estate ownership goals the specialists at Bank of America Private Bank draw upon these strengths regional knowledge of the real estate market expertise in wealth management and the extensive resources of a leading financial institution. At Bank of America Private Bank we view borrowing for the purchase of investment real estate as a strategic wealth management tool. Bank of America Private Bank can assist high net worth clients looking to diversify their balance sheet or investment portfolio. We can offer access to financing for a variety of commercial investment real estate properties including but not limited to Apartments non owner occupied Farm ranch and timberland Industrial properties Office buildings Retail centers Owner occupied commercial real estate Investing in real estate may enhance your overall wealth management strategy through Diversification 1 Investment in real estate can contribute to a well balanced diversified portfolio because its performance is often not correlated to the equity markets. Cash flow Real estate investments can create a stable cash flow source for retirement and other needs. Favorable tax treatment 2 Taxpayers who itemize deductions may be able to deduct investment interest when the loan is used to purchase property held for investment. Customized Financing Options and Risk Management Our underwriting sophistication and capabilities allow us to create financing based on your unique needs. We have the knowledge and product expertise to create a customized flexible loan structure based on your balance sheet asset allocation cash flow tax considerations and general wealth building objectives. We can offer a comprehensive array of financing solutions with competitive features and terms from the traditional to the complex. We offer variable rate financing options and interest rate hedging strategies. A customized credit solution that includes an interest rate swap cap collar or other flexible strategy may help you manage interest rate risk while meeting your income and borrowing requirements.3 Dedicated Advice and Access Investment real estate lending at Bank of America Private Bank offers you a broad range of experience and the ability to bring you choices and flexibility many other providers don t offer. We understand real estate and our specialists within Bank of America Private Bank and across Bank of America can assist you with many different property types providing guidance and access to the appropriate type of financing for you. The Resources of a Leader In addition to customized commercial real estate financing Bank of America Private Bank can deliver access to a wide spectrum of credit capabilities and a depth of resources expertise and capital strength that few financial institutions can match. The critical dimension we bring to this relationship is a high level of personal service because you work with knowledgeable credit specialists who seek to ensure that your credit strategy effectively complements the other key components of your wealth management plan. Supported by the capital base of Bank of America Private Bank we have the flexibility to fund significant loans while offering competitive terms and interest rates. Because time may be a critical factor as you evaluate different financing options we provide a prompt and informed response to all credit requests. Considerations and Risks Customized lending solutions involve special risks and may not be appropriate for all clients. Customized lending solutions may be subject to additional credit and legal approval. Clients should consult with their independent attorney tax advisor and investment manager before implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. Clients should also consider their portfolio diversification requirements time horizon risk tolerance debt tolerance tax situation and any cash flow and appreciation objectives they may have. LEARN MORE ABOUT CREDIT EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 