 Practical Drafting published by Bank of America Private Bank is the authoritative resource that estate planners and administrators rely on to keep current. It provides expert perspective on a broad range of estate planning issues and is a comprehensive research tool for answers to most estate planning questions. Written by Richard B. Covey Esq. and Dan T. Hastings Esq. Practical Drafting provides two powerful resources Quarterly Commentaries an ongoing journal and the Trust Will Provisions Manual a comprehensive formbook. Members of Bank of America Private Bank s Office of Chief Fiduciary assist Messrs. Covey and Hastings with identifying topics of interest research and editing the publication. View Sample Lead Articles Points of Interest Click here for more information about Practical Drafting For more information about Practical Drafting contact Bank of America Private Bank 212.852.3055 Erica Bielemeier Slezak Regional Fiduciary Advisor 212.852.3628 Subscribing to Practical Drafting An annual subscription to Practical Drafting is available in hardcopy. One year subscription to the Quarterly Commentaries New subscribers also receive the Trust Will Provisions Manual $500 Quarterly Commentaries sent by First Class Mail additional $25 Marital Deduction and Credit Shelter Dispositions and the Use of Formula Provisions This book and its annual supplement provides in a single source comprehensive and in depth knowledge on this topic. It reflects all developments in this area since 1984 including the impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. The book features Descriptions and comparisons of the principles behind pecuniary amount and fractional share credit shelter and marital deduction dispositions Estate planning considerations Model credit shelter and marital deduction forms A discussion of the impact of state death tax laws and the significance of IRC Sec. 2058 An up to date appendix on state laws governing which types of dispositions An up to date state death tax survey chart An analysis of the Hubert regulations This publication acknowledged to be the single most useful work in this subject area has been cited frequently over the years in case law as well as scholarly publications. You may order this book as a standalone order or with Practical Drafting. For subscribers of Practical Drafting $250 For non subscribers $275 Click Here for Ordering Information LEARN MORE ABOUT TRUSTS ESTATES EXPLORE A STRATEGIC PARTNERSHIP 