 During the last 50 years the number and scope of women owned businesses have risen at a virtually unprecedented rate. This historic expansion is due to the efforts of courageous women who have been willing to take the leap and become entrepreneurs at times capitalizing on groundbreaking legislation specifically related to equality. Today women are starting and growing their own businesses at record rates they own an estimated 11.6 million businesses employ nearly 9 million people and generate more than $1.7 trillion in annual revenues.1 Given what these numbers reveal about the economic growth and societal impact driven by women business owners Bank of America is proud to present its newest white paper Women s Entrepreneurial Journeys Profiles in leadership in an era of new opportunities which examines whether there is something distinct about how women approach entrepreneurship create and direct wealth and define success. The paper is based on interviews with eight women at different stages of their personal and professional lives. Their companies cover a wide range of industries are located across the U.S. and all but one have annual revenues exceeding $5 million. Six began their careers as legislative educational and societal changes in the 1960s and 1970s were offering women new opportunities in the business world. Also profiled are two Millennial women who founded companies in a decade when far more women are economically empowered though not without challenges. Our goal in this paper is to uncover the journey to leadership of successful women business owners their impact on society and the factors contributing to their success in creating wealth and growing their businesses. No journey is alike however in the course of interviewing the business owners five prevailing themes emerged People and culture Education experience and a little luck Access to capital Resiliency and optimism The importance of women s leadership All of these admirable women became successful business owners who have brought financial value innovative skills enduring cultures and job creation to the U.S. economy society and their respective industries. Their stories reveal that expanding educational and entrepreneurial opportunities for young girls and women goes beyond simply supporting gender equality it is also about creating brand new pathways for women to lead and just as our eight entrepreneurs did contribute to the economy and society. READ THE EXECUTIVE SUMMARY READ THE FULL WHITEPAPER PROFILE BUILD A BEAR WORKSHOP PROFILE COASTAL SEAFOODS PROFILE CREATIVE KIDS LEARNING CENTER PROFILE EVOLVE MKD PROFILE HYDRAFLOW CORPORATION PROFILE CASTERS WHEELS AND INDUSTRIAL HANDLING INC. PROFILE THE ACTONE GROUP PROFILE AUSTIN COCKTAILS For more information about The Women s Entrepreneur s Journey please contact Karen Reynolds Sharkey National Business Owner Strategy Executive 212.852.3379 Email LEARN MORE ABOUT BUSINESS OWNERS EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 