 Recreational property can be a rewarding asset in your portfolio as well as a source of long term enjoyment. That s why you may want your financial strategy to reflect your strategic vision for the purchase preservation and enhancement of your family s land. At Bank of America Private Bank we recognize that each of our clients has unique objectives. Whether you re looking to diversify your portfolio use the land for recreation or provide for future generations let us help you with credit needs for this significant facet of your legacy. Whether you are purchasing a new property or leveraging an existing property s equity you can benefit from our competitive rates and timely response time. We finance many types of recreational properties including Ranches Fishing retreats Equestrian facilities Vineyards Farms We recognize that an investment in recreational real estate has personal and financial dimensions. Your advisor can work with you to help tailor a financing solution that addresses both sets of goals. Flexible Efficient Customized Financing As a client of Bank of America Private Bank you will enjoy the benefits of financing tailored to your particular real estate investment goals. Our experience has been that our rates are competitive with those of other providers and we are committed to guiding you through the closing process and on to the enjoyment of your property as quickly as possible. We offer both consumer and commercial lending channels and can focus on your transactions as well as provide additional benefits that may include Payment schedules to match your current cash flow or an expected liquidity event Flexible collateral options A Powerful Combination of Experience and Resources Bank of America Private Bank combines experience across a wide range of credit products with access to the underwriting sophistication of Bank of America. The result is a uniquely customized credit solution aligned with your personal objectives. Providing credit to our clients is a core capability not an accommodation. We have credit professionals located throughout the country who are dedicated to helping meet the specialized credit needs of Bank of America Private Bank clients. Considerations and Risks Customized lending solutions involve special risks and may not be appropriate for all clients. Customized lending solutions may be subject to additional credit and legal approval. Clients should consult with their independent attorney tax advisor and investment manager before implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. Clients should also consider their portfolio diversification requirements time horizon risk tolerance debt tolerance tax situation and any cash flow and appreciation objectives they may have. The Resources of a Leader In addition to customized recreational real estate financing Bank of America can deliver access to a wide spectrum of credit capabilities and a depth of resources experience and capital strength that few financial institutions can match. The critical dimension we bring to this relationship is a high level of personal service because you work with knowledgeable credit specialists who seek to ensure that your credit strategy effectively complements the other key components of your wealth management plan. Supported by the capital base of Bank of America we have the flexibility to fund significant loans while offering competitive terms and interest rates. Because time may be a critical factor as you evaluate different financing options we provide a prompt and informed response to all credit requests. For more information contact your advisor. LEARN MORE ABOUT CREDIT EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 