 A yacht is a significant purchase one that requires considerable knowledge in both the acquisition and financing processes. Whether you re searching for the right craft constructing a new one or having your current yacht refitted the yacht division at Bank of America Private Bank can help you achieve your objectives with a customized credit solution aligned with your ownership structure and cash flow. We have helped hundreds of clients acquire substantial vessels and can offer you the benefits of this experience. Working with the yacht finance specialists at Bank of America you can benefit from In depth knowledge of the product offerings in the yacht industry Financing solutions designed around your needs All the resources of one of the most respected financial institutions Consultation and Guidance The yacht specialists are focused and seasoned veterans. Their experience in both customized yacht financing and addressing the intricacies of the purchasing process provides them with an understanding of the key players in the yacht market including builders brokers and surveyors as well as legal insurance and other industry professionals. Whether your dreams include owning a luxury motor yacht a sleek sailboat or a sport fishing vessel the specialists at Bank of America N.A.can help. The team draws upon these strengths in depth knowledge of the yacht industry experience in wealth management and the extensive resources of a leading financial institution. We can work with your tax and legal advisors as your specialized consultant to guide you through the process of purchasing and financing your yacht. We understand that buying a yacht should be a pleasure and we want to help you move seamlessly through your buying experience. A resource for first time buyers The team of specialists will walk you through the process from registration tax and insurance issues to ownership and loan structures. Where appropriate we will refer you to the industry professionals who can provide you with the guidance you will need to make informed decisions on these important issues. We also can pass on valuable insights we have gained from helping other clients. These insights can help you decide whether to buy an existing yacht or construct a new one whether to offer your yacht for charter and how to handle crew issues. Structuring an appropriate loan Just as a yacht reflects your lifestyle so should its financing structure. The specialists will talk with you about your unique financial needs to help determine a loan structure that works for you. With customized repayment options loan terms and amortization schedules we offer considerable flexibility in how to structure credit. Alternatives can be simple or more sophisticated including risk management strategies. Registering your yacht Many of our clients choose to register their yachts in a foreign jurisdiction. The reasons are many and include tax considerations crew hiring and estate planning issues. Our goal is to help ensure that you have all the information you need to make the decision that best fits your needs. Building a custom yacht versus buying a completed yacht Construction projects require an added level of knowledge which few lending institutions possess. We provide construction financing for many of our clients and will be able to share multiple perspectives with you based upon our knowledge and years of experience working with clients shipyards surveyors and brokers. At Bank of America the yacht specialists have assisted clients on financing projects in the United States and abroad. We ve visited many shipyards so we have a firsthand understanding of the construction process and special considerations involved in building a custom yacht. We ve participated in financing projects ranging from small in size to very large multimillion dollar projects. We also can provide information on managing currency risk offering solutions such as multicurrency loans. Considerations and Risks Customized lending solutions involve special risks and may not be appropriate for all clients. Customized lending solutions may be subject to additional credit and legal approval. Clients should consult with their independent attorney tax advisor and investment manager before implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. Clients should also consider their portfolio diversification requirements time horizon risk tolerance debt tolerance tax situation and any cash flow and appreciation objectives they may have. The resources of a leader In addition to customized yacht financing Bank of America Private Bank offers access to sophisticated credit capabilities and a depth of resources experience and capital strength that few financial institutions can match. The critical dimension we bring to this relationship is a high level of personal service because you work with one knowledgeable specialist who seeks to ensure that your credit strategy effectively complements the rest of your wealth management strategy. The yacht financing product offerings include traditional term loans for the purchase of new or pre owned yachts refit loans bridge loans construction loans and cash out loans. We work with you to identify a loan structure to help meet your financial needs. Please contact your Bank of America Private Bank to learn more about yacht financing options. Your Bank of America Private Bank advisor can introduce you to a credit executive from Bank of America N.A. who is a specialist in yacht financing. Together they can assemble a team to evaluate your financial picture and structure a financing solution designed to meet your unique needs. LEARN MORE ABOUT CREDIT EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 