 Not too long ago artificial intelligence AI may have seemed decidedly futuristic but in today s world that is far from being the case. If you drive a car with adaptive cruise control tell your smartphone to search for a nearby restaurant or watch a recommended movie on a streaming service you re already using AI technology. Companies whose products you use from financial services companies to retailers lean heavily on AI to learn more about their customers improve manufacturing efficiency and even help choose new employees.1 It is hardly an exaggeration to say we re no longer at the dawn of the Age of AI we are living within it. Defining AI by type At its most basic AI is made up of algorithms or blocks of computer instructions that can learn from the data they process. Using that data they can create new or modify existing algorithms essentially giving the appearance of being intelligent at least to a degree. Broadly speaking there are three types of AI narrow general and super.2 Much of the AI we see today is considered to be of the narrow variety. Narrow AI allows a machine to perform tasks that are usually associated with human cognition but only in a single domain in which it has been specifically trained says Ehiwario Efeyini senior analyst Market Strategy Bank of America Private Bank. For instance Deep Blue the AI system that defeated chess master Garry Kasparov in 1997 couldn t play checkers or tic tac toe because it lacked the ability to automatically use knowledge from one area and transfer it to another area as a human might do. General AI which has yet to advance beyond the conceptual stage would in theory allow machines to understand and reason not unlike humans Efeyini says. But this does not apply to the AI systems in use or under development today. And then there is a hypothetical third category Super AI. If that ever becomes a reality many decades from now we ll have reached what some call the singularity. That is the point where machines become smarter than people in almost every area and AI autonomously engages in a kind of runaway development cycle that s beyond human control.3 That may seem like a daunting scenario yet Super AI may also hold the promise of helping to solve many of the world s most complex issues such as disease and climate. The evolution The concept of artificial intelligence has been around since at least the 1950s in the writings of British mathematician Alan Turing and others and AI has shown up in Hollywood movies for almost as long the sci fi classic 2001 A Space Odyssey featuring a seemingly sentient and murderously paranoid AI based computer named HAL 4 recently turned 50 . The technology itself has been making occasional headlines since the 1990s see paragraph on Deep Blue . But only in recent years has the technology insinuated itself seemingly quite quickly into our everyday lives. Here s how that happened Here are the areas investors should keep their eyes on according to Joseph Quinlan and Ehiwario Efeyini of Bank of America Private Bank A product of bigger stronger faster technology There are a number of factors in AI s dazzling expansion says Joseph P. Quinlan head of Market Strategy at Bank of America Private Bank. One key driver is recent technological improvements he says. More advanced semiconductors new programming techniques such as machine learning faster and more pervasive networks and the expansion of cloudbased data centers have all led to faster computing faster communications and a greater ability to move huge amounts of data in a shorter time. This techno supercharging has also enabled the spread of linked devices or what s often called the Internet of Things IoT by the billions. As Quinlan notes With the IoT people are using more connected devices from watches to washing machines and those items themselves can communicate with each other via the cloud. Newer technology has also enabled the proliferation of voice activated virtual assistants like the kind on your smartphone which seem to chat with you in real time. In reality you re probably not talking with the device itself but rather with AI on a distant server where most of the voice recognition and speech generation occurs and where perhaps your voice is recorded . At the same time Quinlan says we are living in an era of what s often called Big Data. And how big is big Some research suggests more data has been created in the past few years than in the entire history of the human race he says. And that mass of data could become 40 times larger in just a few years. 5 Indeed every time you send a text message load a photo to the cloud post on social media or use a search engine you add to the data mix. And it s safe to say that as millions more people become connected and set up social media accounts data production will continue to skyrocket.6 BANK OF AMERICA AND THE RESPONSIBLE DEPLOYMENT OF AI The potential held by artificial intelligence to transform business and society is vast. But as the medical travel and financial services industries consider how best to use it they should ensure that they do so wisely says Cathy Bessant Bank of America s chief operations and technology officer. We re responsible for the outcomes that the technology creates says Bessant adding that financial institutions given their impact have a monumental responsibility to get AI right. To meet that responsibility Bessant advocates inclusion of ethical and moral considerations in the technology s up front development rigorous testing before implementation and strict governance throughout its use. For Bessant it s critical to understand that AI is only as unbiased as the people who create it. As a product of humans artificial intelligence is subject to the same foibles of human nature she says. For example an algorithm using historically statistically or geographically biased data might reflect those biases in its decision making and negatively impact clients. According to Bessant avoiding such unintended consequences is a key goal of responsible AI development. As part of its efforts to do that Bank of America has partnered with Harvard University s Kennedy School of Government to establish the Council on the Responsible Use of Artificial Intelligence.7 The council brings together leaders from private business education and government to consider how best to capture the benefits of AI while taking a deliberate approach to minimizing its risks. It s incredibly important that AI deployment doesn t outpace our ability to understand and act on the implications of what we re doing Bessant says. Ultimately responsible AI is not about what we can do it s about what we should do. Shining a light on dark data Without question a mountain of stored data has accumulated but it turns out that only about 10 of it is usable in its current form the other 90 is considered dark 8 or unstructured a bit like a city map without street names. Nonetheless many corporations have continued to collect this unstructured data with the hope of using it down the line. With AI that is now possible. Certain machine learning and analytical tools featuring AI are helping companies extract usable information from this deep pool of data meaning that once buried customer purchasing histories patient records traffic patterns and old documents are being made newly accessible. One key issue here is customer or patient privacy which all too often has proved difficult to protect in recent years. As more of this unstructured data becomes useable maintaining anonymity and using information responsibly will become ever more crucial. Beyond factories and medical facilities Robots have been used in automotive factories and hospital operating rooms for years but AI is pushing long standing boundaries. In auto plants for example recent developments have equipped machines with the ability to perform tasks like welding and painting while simultaneously looking for product defects.9 In the operating room AI is bringing more autonomy and precision to surgical machines in part by using improved visual inputs.10 Meanwhile in Japan Quinlan says AI driven robots are helping to provide care for a growing elderly population in a country that has a declining number of care providers. For more see A Robotics Revolution in Japan. A ROBOTICS REVOLUTION IN JAPAN By Joseph P. Quinlan head of CIO Market Strategy Bank of America Private Bank Japan is leading the way in confronting an aging society and the knock on effects of a labor shortage and soaring costs for elder care. In doing so it s also part of the larger pursuit of a robotics revolution that could transform Japanese society and be replicated around the world. The revolution goes well beyond the factory floor. Here are a few examples of how Pepper leads exercises for seniors in caregiving facilities and is used in banks sushi shops and funeral homes clad in a Buddhist robe it recites sutras aphorisms reducing funeral costs. Robear can carry the elderly to and from the bathroom and place them in wheelchairs. Paro is a miniature robotic plush seal that engages the elderly to help ward off dementia. Vevo identifies and greets children in day care and monitors them while napping countering a teacher shortage. The revised Japan Revitalization Strategy envisions a new industrial revolution driven by robots and the country is considered among the best at producing such technology along with Germany Switzerland and China. Robots that can learn Using neural networks and machine learning AI is now capable of creating its own rules of operation. One way it does that is by finding patterns in large datasets and then using these insights to develop its own rules of operation and to make decisions says Efeyini. In short some AI can learn and then change an approach as needed. And on the horizon are AI systems that will have the ability to correct themselves. Researchers have been focusing on developing algorithms that can help AI more easily learn from its own mistakes 11 Efeyini says. Image identification Since digital images are essentially just another form of data AI can often find patterns within them. The software powering autonomous cars works this way Efeyini says. You want the car to recognize other objects on the road such as cyclists pedestrians road signs and other vehicles. So instead of writing computer code to specify the features of another car which would take considerable time and expense you can now feed a computer many images of cars and it ll learn visually. A similar kind of AI is at play when your smartphone organizes the photos of your parents into a single album whether you asked it to or not . Similarly in recent advances in the health care field he says an AI system was able to detect early stage skin cancer from patient images at a rate of accuracy comparable to human dermatologists. 12 Other improvements in AI supported medical detection have been seen in lung cancer screenings as well.13 Facial recognition Another type of image identification operates in facial recognition FR technology. For an example of this process look no further than your smartphone. AI can unlock your phone by projecting a swarm of infrared dots onto your face and reading the reflected light comparing what it sees with the image of you stored in its memory. As use of facial recognition grows it is raising considerable concerns about privacy. To help understand the broader some might say Orwellian uses of FR consider China. As Quinlan notes AI powered FR is being tested by the Chinese government with a primary goal of using it for law enforcement. In this case multiple cameras scan crowds isolating each individual face AI algorithms then search a central database for those faces. If the system flags individuals with a criminal record or spots someone breaking a minor law such as for jaywalking Quinlan says local police wearing special augmented reality glasses can spot and perhaps arrest the offender. 14 While use of FR in the U.S. may not be as acute as it is in China some police departments here routinely employ it 15 and several major U.S. airlines are already using curb to gate FR systems in airports.16 It seems almost inevitable that in time facial recognition technology will see a wider role among government agencies and corporations and calls for its responsible use will surely grow louder. For more on corporate responsibility see Bank of America and the Responsible Deployment of AI. Into the future Despite what seems to be AI s already ubiquitous presence in our lives we are likely to see an even greater proliferation in coming years. Indeed global spending on AI is expected to reach $77 billion a year in 2022 up from about $24 billion in 2018.17 As Quinlan notes We think AI will become even more widespread in time as sales of devices that connect to the internet rise more companies begin making sense of dark data and millions of people gain access to the internet for the first time. Efeyini adds that in contrast with the dot com mania of 20 years ago today s new technologies are experiencing widespread commercial application generating cost savings and delivering a range of new value added products and services whether through artificial intelligence software cloud computing robotics digital media high speed telecom networks or connected objects. While the use of AI will continue to raise genuine social and ethical concerns about privacy political control malevolent robots and the like it is already improving lives and creating efficiencies in ways that even more imaginative minds may never have envisioned. And the same may be true for investment opportunities. For more on AI and sectors that may benefit from the application of AI contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor. 