 THE PERSISTENT ISSUE OF GENDER INEQUALITY makes headlines on an almost daily basis. From all male boardrooms to the lack of gender parity in secondary education the inequalities that women face are motivating investors to seek positive change while continuing to pursue their investment goals. They re doing so by incorporating gender factors to their overall investment approach often called gender lens investing GLI . GLI is a way to leverage the market to support progress towards gender equality in the workplace the supply chain the consumer market and elsewhere by giving companies a financial and ethical incentive to hire and promote with equality in mind. And simultaneously it s a way to identify areas of opportunity in the search for enhanced investment returns sustainable growth and lower risk. Gender lens investing GLI is the intentional incorporation of gender based factors into investment analysis with the intention of driving both financial performance and social benefit. Gender lens investing GLI is the intentional incorporation of gender based factors into investment analysis with the intention of driving both financial performance and social benefit. Investors and companies are responding We re hearing more about gender lens investing today because there is a growing interest among consumers and investors in supporting gender equality as a fundamental human right says Jackie VanderBrug Head of Sustainable and Impact Investment Strategy for the Chief Investment Office CIO . This support is reflected in increasing calls for equal pay for women more diversity on boards and in upper management the production of consumer products beneficial to women and other areas. Consider the following Research company McKinsey estimates that achieving global gender parity could boost global gross domestic product GDP by $12 28 trillion. 1 According to research firm Deloitte the best emerging talent wants to work for companies that value diversity and have a forward thinking mindset. 2 Research suggests that while performance results have varied over time companies with higher scores on board diversity and management diversity saw consistently higher future return on equities ROEs than counterparts with lower scores. 3 Gender diversity yields many benefits Equally important research indicates that a company s gender diversity can be a fairly reliable indicator along with traditional metrics such as return on equity and debt free cash flow of its potential for investment outperformance relative to the broader market. A recent study suggests that outperformance may derive for example from better decision making by a more diverse group of directors including those with a greater representation of women. 4 Outperformance may also be tied to greater gender diversity among senior leadership and the rest of the workforce which may in turn be correlated with reduced turnover and higher employee engagement. Education Employment Entrepreneurship Higher education is considered a gateway to advancement in the workplace and while there is still a long way to go to reach gender parity especially in secondary education in the United States women are now in the majority at all levels of higher education attaining 5 64 of bachelor s degrees 57 of master s degrees 53 of doctoral degrees The underrepresentation of women in business particularly in the upper levels of management points to a notable waste of talent. However we have seen progress as women now make up 47 of total workforce and 52 of professional occupations. 6 As organizations do a better job of incorporating women s skills they stand to benefit from it on the financial bottom line. Entrepreneurship is by almost any measure the backbone of the U.S. economy and women have seen incredible progress. Over 40 of total U.S. businesses are now owned by women with 1 821 women owned businesses launched daily on average. 7 However entrepreneurship is an area with persistent gaps and opportunities only 2 of global venture capital dollars are granted to female founders. 8 We re hearing more about gender lens investing today because there is a growing interest among consumers and investors in supporting gender equality as a fundamental human right. Jackie VanderBrug Head of Sustainable and Impact Investment Strategy for the Chief Investment Office CIO While the advantages of women in the boardroom and executive suite are reasonably well documented the benefit of adding women extends across an entire company or organization from every level of the workforce and all the way down the supply chain. VanderBrug says. The future of gender lens investing Going forward the quality and quantity of gender related data and research should continue to expand making it easier for investors to consider gender related issues in making investment decisions. The use of gender data promises advances in fields from life sciences to software with innovations standing to benefit not just women but all consumers. Opportunity can also be found in investing in products that address global issues disproportionately affecting women such as maternal mortality clean water indoor air pollution personal safety and human trafficking. The bottom line is this investing with a gender lens can help scale up the companies that significantly improve the lives of women and girls. This type of progress is something we are confident will continue. No matter the political environment we believe the issue of gender will only grow in importance in the workforce in the home and around the globe. For more insights on how you can make a difference through gender lens investing read Gender Lens Investing What It Is and Why It s Important from our Chief Investment Office. 