 Executive Summary Insights into the motivations priorities and strategies of wealthy donors Key Findings Giving is being shaped by a diverse donor universe of different ages ethnic backgrounds and gender identities. Women are at the forefront of philanthropic engagement and impact. An opportunity for nonprofits and advisors is highlighted by the fact that only 49 of donors have a strategy for their giving. INTRODUCTION The 2018 U.S. Trust Study of High Net Worth Philanthropy1 the Study is the seventh in a biennial series of reports on the giving and volunteering practices of wealthy households in the United States. Based on a nationally representative random sample of wealthy households the Study is an authoritative source of information on wealthy Americans philanthropic attitudes and practices. The wealth threshold for inclusion in the Study is a widely recognized standard based on the qualifying level for certain types of financial investments an annual household income greater than $200 000 and or net worth greater than $1 000 000 excluding the value of the primary residence . For this year s Study population the median annual household income was approximately $350 000 and the median net worth was $2 000 000 well above the entry level threshold. The total Study population in 2018 comprised 1 646 households. Forty nine percent of respondents identified themselves as men while 51 identified themselves as women. Eight percent of Study respondents reported that their country of origin or birth is outside the U.S. Of those born in the U.S. 12 percent have at least one parent whose country of origin or birth was outside the U.S. Viewed by race and ethnicity the Study is composed of 9 Asian American Pacific Islanders 6 Black African Americans 78 Caucasian Whites 6 Hispanic Latinos and 1 Other Race. In addition 7 of households in the Study identified themselves as LGBTQ. We also surveyed respondents across four distinct generations. Taken together the baby boom generation and those older than baby boomers continue to constitute the largest generational grouping in the sample with 51 and 17 of respondents respectively for a total of two thirds of the respondent population. Together the millennial generation and Generation X taken together now constitute one third of Study respondents representing 19 and 14 respectively.2 GENEROSITY IS THE NORM AMONG HIGH NET WORTH AMERICANS As in past years Studies the overwhelming majority of American high net worth households reported making charitable donations. Last year 90 of this group gave to charity compared to 56 of the general U.S. population.3 On average high net worth donors gave $29 269 to charity in 2017 up by 15 from $25 509 in 2015.4 By comparison households in the general population gave an average of $2 514 comparable to the $2 520 reported in 2016.5 In the High Net Worth Study charitable giving was practiced somewhat more frequently by women at 93 and in African American households at 92 . GIVING BY WEALTHY DONORS SUPPORTS A RANGE OF CAUSES Wealthy donors gave to an average of seven different nonprofit organizations in 2017. These donations supported a wide range of charitable causes with basic needs organizations receiving support from the largest percentage 54 of high net worth households. Additional causes supported by wealthy donors included religion 49 health care or medical research 36 combined charities6 31 and youth or family services 29 . Thirty six percent of high net worth households gave to educational causes including 22 giving to higher education while 24 gave to K 12 education. Women were more likely to support health care and medical research at 40 . African American high net worth households supported basic needs charities at a rate of 72 significantly higher than the overall Study population and African American and Hispanic American households were more likely to support religious charities at 64 and 59 respectively than the high net worth population as a whole. Combined charities organizations include United Way United Jewish Appeal Catholic Charities and community foundations among others Other organizations include LGBTQ veterans affairs among others WEALTHY HOUSEHOLDS ARE ALSO GENEROUS WITH THEIR TIME In 2017 48 of wealthy individuals volunteered their time and talents to charitable organizations they care about a rate nearly twice that of the total survey population 25 .8 Women were more likely to volunteer than men at 56 versus 41 and 60 of Hispanic Americans volunteered well above the Study average. The main factors that motivated volunteering were responding to an organizational need 65 believing that the individual can make a difference 56 the alignment of the organization with the individual s personal values or beliefs 52 and being concerned about those less fortunate or about a particular cause or group being served 43 each . Service on a nonprofit organization s board was cited as being among their volunteer activities by 24 of respondents. For this group the main reasons for accepting the invitation to serve were belief in the organization s mission 72 and the opportunity to use their skills and experience 71 . In addition to donating their time 38 of respondents who serve on a board said that they give more in financial support to that organization than to those organizations where they do not serve. As with the decision to serve the main reason for this increased level of giving was belief in the mission of the organization 81 . WEALTHY DONORS MOTIVATIONS EXPECTATIONS AND CHALLENGES Wealthy donors give for personal and altruistic reasons. In citing the top four reasons for their donations in 2017 54 of wealthy households said they always gave because of their belief in the mission of the organization 42 always gave because of their belief that their gift can make a difference 34 always gave to support the same cause or organization year after year and 32 always gave to experience personal satisfaction enjoyment or fulfillment. Receiving tax benefits is generally not a prime motivation for giving. Just 17 of wealthy donors said they were always motivated to give by tax benefits consistent with the 18 of those who cited this as a motivation in 2015. An additional 51 said that tax benefits sometimes motivate their giving. Gifts come with clear expectations. Wealthy donors indicated that it is very important or somewhat important that the organizations they support demonstrate sound business and operational practices 91 spend only a reasonable amount on general administrative and fundraising expenses 90 acknowledge donations by providing a receipt for tax purposes 86 honor their requests for anonymity and for how their gift is to be used 85 and 81 respectively and not distribute their names to others 83 . And 57 said that they would like to receive a thank you note. Why wealthy donors stop giving. Twenty eight percent of wealthy donors stopped giving to at least one organization last year citing reasons that included receiving too frequent solicitations from the nonprofit organization 41 believing that the organization was not effective or did not sufficiently communicate its effectiveness 16 and being asked by the nonprofit organization for an amount the donor felt was inappropriate 9 . Challenges faced by wealthy donors. Wealthy donors reported that their greatest challenge9 when it comes to charitable giving is identifying what causes they care about and deciding where to donate 45 . Other charitable giving challenges include understanding how much they can afford to give 37 allocating time to volunteer with the organizations they care about 30 and monitoring giving to ensure it has its intended impact 30 . Wealthy donors also seek knowledge and advice about giving. Here the interests of donors range from learning how to identify the right volunteer opportunities 38 to becoming more familiar with nonprofits and how they serve their constituents needs 28 to exploring how to engage the next generation in philanthropic giving 19 . Challenges to Charitable Decision Making Percentage of those who identified as challenging MORE ENGAGED DONORS ARE MORE PERSONALLY FULFILLED AND MORE GENEROUS There is a strong correlation between wealthy donors level of knowledge about charitable giving and certain giving behaviors including whether they have a strategy and a budget for their giving monitor or evaluate the impact of their giving and use a giving vehicle such as a donor advised fund charitable trust or private foundation . When wealthy donors reported being more knowledgeable they also tended to be more personally fulfilled from their charitable activity as well as more likely to give more. TAKING A MORE STRATEGIC APPROACH TO GIVING Less than half of wealthy donors have a strategy or a budget in place to guide their charitable giving 49 and 48 respectively . Those who have a giving vehicle are significantly more likely to have a strategy 75 and a budget 64 than the overall respondent group. Older non millennial donors are also significantly more likely to have a strategy and budget for their giving than younger donors. These findings appear to point to an opportunity for nonprofits and advisors to engage in more meaningful ways with donors regarding their philanthropy. THE MISSION OF THE ORGANIZATION MATTERS Wealthy donors giving decisions are driven to a far greater extent by the organization 59 than by the issues 31 or the geographic areas 2 the organization seeks to address. Wealthy donors are also guided by their personal values. When determining which nonprofit organizations to support the majority of high net worth individuals draw upon their personal values 74 interest in the issue area addressed by the organization 57 and having firsthand experience with the organization 54 . Other factors include the reputation of the organization 50 and the perceived need of the organization 49 . GIVING FOR DISASTER RELIEF In a year of severe natural disasters Hurricanes Harvey Maria and Irma the earthquakes in Mexico and the wildfires in California among others high net worth households were strong donors. Nearly half 46 donated to relief efforts related to Hurricane Harvey 24 to relief efforts for Hurricanes Maria and 19 to efforts for Hurricane Irma. Importantly nearly all these donors reported that their donations to disaster relief either did not affect their giving to other causes 89 or caused them to give more to other causes 4 . GIVING TO WOMEN S AND GIRLS CAUSES AND ORGANIZATIONS One in five high net worth households 20 donated to women s and girls charities in 2017 with an average donation amount of over $1 800. Within this group a higher proportion of female respondents 25 donated to these causes. When asked what motivated their support by far the most frequent reason cited by donors 58 was a belief that supporting women and girls is the most effective way to solve other social problems. About half of the donors to these organizations 51 gave to organizations focused entirely on women s and girls issues and 43 donated to organizations focused primarily but not exclusively on women s and girls issues. The most frequently cited causes supported by these donations were women s health in the United States 39 addressing violence against women 37 and reproductive health rights 36 . GIVING AS A FAMILY AFFAIR Decision making is shared in wealthy households. Half 50 of respondents who are married or partnered reported that they make decisions about their giving jointly with their spouse or partner. Only 19 of respondents reported being the sole decision maker while 12 of respondents reported making decisions separately but conferring with each other before giving. Ninety four percent of female respondents and 95 of male respondents participate in their household s philanthropic decisions either together with their spouse or partner or as the sole decision maker. Family comes first when leaving a legacy. When asked how they would like to ultimately distribute their wealth 74 of high net worth individuals reported that they intend to leave the majority to their children and grandchildren while 12 said they intended to leave the majority of their wealth to other heirs. Fourteen percent of high net worth individuals intend to leave 23 of their wealth to charities. GIVING IS SEEN AS A MEANS TO CREATE THE GREATEST IMPACT10 In considering what they believe has the greatest potential for positive impact on society wealthy donors cited charitable giving 39 and volunteering 32 above all else. The next largest percentage of respondents believe that voting for a political candidate who shares their ideals may have the greatest impact 16 . Wealthy donors are unsure about the impact of their gifts. While they believe giving to be the most effective way to create impact only 42 of wealthy donors believe their giving is having the impact they intended. Another 4 say it is not having the impact they intend while 54 do not know. This lack of confidence may be largely because 78 of wealthy donors do not monitor or evaluate the impact of their charitable giving. Among those respondents with a giving vehicle however a robust 62 believe that their giving is having the impact they intended. To determine whether their giving is having the impact they intended a clear majority of 71 of respondents rely on information from the organization to which they donated indicating that improving communication strategies for donors may serve to increase donor confidence. Impact investing11 has some impact on giving levels. Among the 7 of wealthy donors who participate in impact investing more than two thirds 68 do so in addition to their existing charitable giving while 19 do so in place of at least some of their charitable giving. Just 9 of wealthy donors who engage in impact investing do so in place of all of their charitable giving. Millennials and women are significantly more likely to participate in impact investing with 16 of this group reporting activity in this area. Seven ways to make a positive impact on society CONFIDENCE IN THE INSTITUTIONS OF CIVIL SOCIETY Wealthy individuals have more confidence in nonprofits than in government. Evidencing a deep cultural tradition of collective and voluntary action high net worth households report having some or a great deal of confidence in nonprofit organizations 86 and individuals 81 to solve societal or global problems. Respondents had far less confidence in state or local governments 65 the president federal executive branch 46 and Congress federal legislative branch 40 . CONCLUSION As American society continues to change the patterns of philanthropic behavior by high net worth households will doubtless evolve as well. We believe that the data in this year s report illuminate not only the current robust status of philanthropic activity in this country but also provide insights into what the future may bring. At U.S. Trust we are proud to be part of America s philanthropic fabric providing services that help to enhance the philanthropic pursuits of donors and nonprofit organizations. ABOUT THIS SURVEY The 2018 U.S. Trust Study of High Net Worth Philanthropy examines giving and volunteering trends behaviors attitudes and priorities among wealthy American households. Since 2006 this biennial study has been written and researched in partnership with the Indiana University Lilly Family School of Philanthropy. This research series is one of the most comprehensive and longest running of its kind and is an important barometer for wealthy donors charitable engagement and perspectives. METHODOLOGY The Study represents an analysis of data gathered from a survey of more than 1 600 U.S. households with a net worth of $1 million or more excluding the value of their primary home and or an annual household income of $200 000 or more. The seventh in this series of studies was based on a nationally representative sample of wealthy donors including deeper analysis based on age gender sexual orientation and race. This expanded methodology enabled further exploration of the philanthropic trends strategies and behaviors among the high net worth population. Conducted between April and June 2018 the survey asked respondents about charitable giving and volunteering behaviors and attitudes for the year 2017. ABOUT U.S. TRUST U.S. Trust has been a leading advisor to the philanthropic and nonprofit communities for over 160 years. With professionals located in offices throughout the United States we help families and nonprofits to fulfill their philanthropic missions with a comprehensive suite of fiduciary services including investment management consulting and advisory services and administrative support. ABOUT THE INDIANA UNIVERSITY LILLY FAMILY SCHOOL OF PHILANTHROPY The Indiana University Lilly Family School of Philanthropy at IUPUI is dedicated to improving philanthropy to improve the world by training and empowering students and professionals to be innovators and leaders who create positive and lasting change. The school offers a comprehensive approach to philanthropy through its academic research and international programs and through The Fund Raising School Lake Institute on Faith Giving the Mays Family Institute on Diverse Philanthropy and the Women s Philanthropy Institute. Please visit philanthropy.iupui.edu to learn more about how we can help you. Learn More About Mission Advancement Donor Strategies Read the Full Study 