 Suzanne Weinstein is the founder and former chief executive officer of Coastal Seafoods which wholesales and retails responsibly sourced fish shellfish and more in Minneapolis and St. Paul MN. She sold the company to Fortune Fish Gourmet in July 2016. Suzanne grew up in Skokie and Evanston IL. Her father made and sold window shades a going concern he bought from her mother s relatives. It grew to be quite a substantial business she says. She remembers her father as a caring employer bailing an employee out of jail and helping others as needed. He attended night school for 14 years to secure a combined accounting and law degree and he applied the skills he learned to his business. Transcript Close Transcript Suzanne Weinstein My name is Suzanne Weinstein and I m from Minneapolis Minnesota. My business was called Costal Seafoods. I started it in 1981 and I had just recently sold it in 2016. We did wholesale and retail fish and seafood and we sold to about 250 restaurants and co ops in Minneapolis. A great thing for me in the transition in selling the business was that it was important that the culture and legacy would stay the same because we are pretty much an institution in the twin cities. And I feel incredibly lucky to have found buyers that are committed to the same thing. They ve told me repeatedly I ll remain proud of my legacy and stuff which I think that s unusual to find perhaps in a buyer. I think it s really important to have a good accountant and a good banker I still bank at the same bank. And I ve had the same accountant pretty much the whole time and have a good lawyer too. It always helps to have a good lawyer. I had an aunt that was a businesswoman since the 40 s. I just remember her saying to me that the proudest accomplishment that she had was being able to employee people for so many years and I really feel like that s the thing that I m proudest about that I was able to employ people for so many years. You know there were challenges that s for sure but the key is to you know to have good people around you cause I couldn t have done this alone. Recorded on April 18 2018 IMPORTANT INFORMATION Opinions expressed herein are those of the featured participants and may differ from those of Bank of America Private Bank BofA Securities Inc. BofAS and Bank of America Corporation and its affiliates. The information presented in this video is for discussion purposes only and is not intended to serve as a recommendation or solicitation for the purchase of sale of any type of security. This video does not constitute investment advice and is issued without regard to specific investment objectives or the financial situation of any particular recipient. This video is designed to provide general information about ideas and strategies. Always consult with your independent attorney tax advisor investment manager and insurance agent for final recommendations and before changing or implementing any financial tax of estate planning strategy. Bank of America is the marketing name for the global banking and global markets businesses of Bank of America Corporation. Lending derivatives and other commercial banking activities are performed globally by banking affiliates of Bank of America Corporation including Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC. Securities strategic advisory and other investment banking activities are performed globally by investment banking affiliates of Bank of America Corporation Investment Banking Affiliates including in the United States BofA Securities Inc. Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated and Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. all of which are registered broker dealers and Members of SIPC and in other jurisdictions by locally registered entities. BofA Securities Inc. Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated and Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. are registered as futures commission merchants with the CFTC and are members of the NFA. Investment products Are Not FDIC Insured Are Not Bank Guaranteed May Lose Value Bank of America Private Bank is a division of Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation. Bank of America N.A. and U.S. Trust Company of Delaware collectively the Bank do not serve in a fiduciary capacity with respect to all products or services. Fiduciary standards or fiduciary duties do not apply for example when the Bank is offering or providing credit solutions banking custody or brokerage products services or referrals to other affiliates of the Bank. 2019 Bank of America Corporation. All rights reserved. Suzanne appreciates the positive impact two aunts had on her. Both ran unconventional enterprises for women of their era. One owned an appliance repair shop she says. The other developed shopping malls and later in her career bought and sold truck terminals. She also financially cared for a number of people. With those women as role models Suzanne says she never thought that her gender would prevent her from doing anything. As a child she says she had no specific aspirations and has never been a big planner. However she knows she has three forever interests food wellness and making arts and crafts. She fondly recalls that as a child she awaited the weekly arrival of Time magazine avidly reading the food medicine and arts articles. In college she received a degree in Spanish and sociology but had no idea what she wanted to do after graduation. She bounced from job to job rarely staying anywhere longer than six months. She moved first to Minneapolis and then to Chicago to be near her family and landed as a bank teller in Evanston. After a few months as a teller she transferred to the bookkeeping department and sometime later became a consultant in computer conversions for banks. After a decade in banking she had a notion that she wanted to try something new. That something came to her somewhat unexpectedly through her lifelong interest in art. Getting Hooked Suzanne often took art courses and enjoyed making things particularly the jewelry she sold at art fairs. She became interested in working with glass and joined a studio of glass blowers. By chance the wife of one of the other glass blowers had a job delivering fish. Fish intrigued her she says so she went to work there. Six weeks later I decided to start my own fish business she says having learned that there were few fish sellers serving Minneapolis. In 1981 people did not cook much fresh fish and few restaurants served it she adds. She laughs as she acknowledges that her journey from banker to fishmonger all sounds wacky. She knew she faced a huge challenge selling fish in Minnesota which borders Lake Superior but is far from an ocean. The former CEO considers herself resourceful and says she does not hesitate to ask anyone for help. When it came time to secure a loan for her business she had many connections through her time as a bank employee and had no difficulty borrowing $500 to purchase a used Chevy van. Notably she says I still bank with the same bank who gave me that first loan. To be licensed to deliver fish she had to operate out of a commercial location with proper refrigeration. She persuaded an Asian grocery owner to allow her to keep her fish in his cooler. She now needed a source of fish. She flew out to Seattle in search of a wholesaler but nobody there would supply her. She returned to Minneapolis discouraged and by chance saw a copy of Savvy magazine. The cover photo showed a man and a woman holding up what turned out to be a tilefish she notes. It was the early 80s and the cod supply was diminishing and the couple were encouraging people to make lesser known species like tilefish a part of their diet. Suzanne called them and they agreed to sell her fifty pounds of fish. In a sense that purchase paved the way for her company s distinctive appeal and selling little known fish became its hallmark. She decided to sell fresh fish. Suzanne also spotted a trend she says Chefs in Minneapolis s upscale white table cloth restaurants were interested in trying new varieties of fresh fish. Her previous work experience meant she had skills to do her own bookkeeping but in the beginning she says I knew nothing about fish and went seeking mentors. A male acquaintance in fish wholesaling discouraged her but another who held a position at the National Oceanographic and Aeronautical Administration gladly mentored her. Suzanne credits his mentorship as being key to the success of Coastal Seafoods. I knew nothing about fish and went seeking mentors. At first she sold and delivered the fish herself in her second hand van. She ordered only as much as she thought she could sell and rarely had any left over. In the early days she never worried she says. I did not have any huge loans and knew I could always find another job. She may have known little about seafood at the start but from her days managing computer conversions Suzanne was familiar with setting up systems and processes. She created a system to receive fresh catch by airplane six times a week from all over the world allowing her to offer her customers over 50 kinds of fish. She rented other businesses refrigerated spaces for some time but came to realize that she wanted to rent an entire building for her own use. Although most landlords shied away from the potentially bad smell of seafood one finally rented her an ideal building with floor drains perfect for cleaning fish. The building also had a front office that she turned into a small retail outlet. She had a strong relationship with her equipment dealer who offered refurbished equipment. Store Stories In 1985 she opened her first store without much financial risk. She quickly discovered that the space was too small to meet demand and transformed some office space into a sales area essentially doubling her capacity. Soon she bought the whole property and she still owns it . Two years later she opened a second retail outlet but its limited parking prompted her to close it soon swearing that she would never open another one. Her vow wavered when an attractive spot in a strip mall in St. Paul opened up she says. That strip mall store has flourished for over 25 years. Again she vowed no more retail but space in an upscale suburban neighborhood became available. She worked hard to make that place succeed even working with the local Chamber of Commerce to expand her business network. Some years later she closed that location. Her company grew organically she says adding about two employees a year and business boomed. She realized that as she grew and hired more people providing growth opportunities was important to keeping them with the company. Her employees enjoyed reputations as fish experts sharing recipes with customers writing cookery books and teaching sushi classes. She insisted on superior cleanliness she says and her sites became known for their sparkling appearance and lack of fishy smell. A Sea Change At age 67 Suzanne had a thriving wholesale operation and two retail stores one in the Seward neighborhood of Minneapolis and the other in St. Paul. Coastal Seafoods had 25 employees and supplied over 50 varieties of fresh seafood to more than 300 restaurants and supermarkets in Minnesota Nebraska the Dakotas Iowa and Wisconsin. She often thought about the future of Coastal Seafoods but as usual she says I had no big plans. After three decades in business she received a beautiful letter out of the blue from a prospective buyer Fortune Fish Gourmet in Chicago. With Fortune Fish s commitment to sustainability employees quality and service the letter sounded as if written in my own voice she says. Some consultants warned her that these cold call letters were common and rarely if ever worked out. However in September 2015 she agreed to meet with representatives from Fortune Fish. For months Suzanne kept the negotiations secret. She wanted to be sure the cultures meshed and that the buyer would keep her employees. They closed the deal in July 2016. Suzanne maintains ownership of the main Coastal Seafoods buildings and stops into a facility at least once a week. The culture of Coastal Seafoods still promises high quality and that pleases her. In fact when she runs into customers she once served many do not know that she has sold the business because the culture is still in place. Even better most of her employees have remained with the company. Post Exit Suzanne continues to serve on civic and business improvement boards and a local planning board. The former CEO is very interested in food justice and was pleased that she was able to lease two of her vacant lots to be used as community supported agricultural gardens. She has a large portfolio of artistic work and has taken classes in just about every creative medium she says. I knit crochet and do mosaics. I m always making something. Shortly after the sale she heard of a project run by the local corrections system for women sentenced to community service. These women meet in Jewelry Circles twice a month and make over 500 pieces a year. The proceeds of their jewelry sales go to Grandmother Circles a nonprofit that helps women in Kenya. Suzanne has enjoyed volunteering with the group. In addition she has used her resources to nurture a similar creativity program at a juvenile residential substance abuse detention center. She also has drawn on her contacts to obtain equipment for a soup kitchen. When asked about tips for others Suzanne stresses that anyone interested in creating a business should not be afraid to ask for help. Any entrepreneur moreover needs an excellent accountant she adds and cultivating great relationships with bankers mentors and equipment suppliers is vital. Most important she says when faced with a challenge be persistent and don t give up. Suzanne chuckles at the memory of the first National Fisheries Institute meeting she attended. In a male dominated environment the organizers kept trying to steer her to the spouse table. She just kept saying I m the owner. Asked how she navigated the fish industry she answers I never thought of myself as being a woman I thought of myself as being a person. I am not afraid to do anything. She believes that women really care about people seeking to build companies that are giant families and everyone is encouraged to have a vested interest in the enterprise and each other. Suzanne expresses gratitude to all of her employees and everyone else who helped her along her way. But in particular she thanks her husband and daughter for their unwavering support. The founder of Coastal Seafoods takes the deepest pride in employing so many people for over 35 years and offering them a great place to work excellent benefits and a retirement plan. She also is proud that Coastal Seafoods remains as a Twin Cities institution. LEARN MORE ABOUT BUSINESS OWNERS EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 