 The world is undergoing profound macro changes in demographics longevity climate change emerging market middle classes global healthcare to name just a few areas. As these macro themes evolve in 2019 and beyond we believe equity investors should consider adding exposure in certain industries as they seek excess return opportunities above the market indices. Here s a brief look at five of those themes. Big Data and AI The explosive growth of digital data collection helped by more advanced semiconductor technologies more pervasive and faster networks and the expansion of cloud based data centers has resulted in 90 of the world s data being created in the past two years.1 Even so only a very small portion of the data generated is ever analyzed. Artificial intelligence AI could be harnessed to create much greater efficiency and potentially lower costs against this big data backdrop in all matters of supply chain inventory and labor management. AI is also central to voice powered personal assistants facial recognition vehicle autonomy and to behavioral algorithms boasting powerful predictive capabilities. Electric Vehicles The number of electric cars EV on the world s roads could rise from 3.1 million in 2017 to 125 million by 2030 increasing demand for EV battery raw materials including cobalt nickel and lithium as well as semiconductors and software.2 Driving the move to electrics are factors such as changes in environmental awareness and social preferences. A future booster of growth in global car sales the rise of the global middle class consumer in developing nations particularly China and India.3 Look also for a rise in the use of autonomous vehicles and a shift from car ownership to car usage especially in ride sharing. Demographics The number of people aged 65 and over is expected to top 1 billion around 2030.4 Aging populations should increase demand for healthcare solutions especially for heart disease cancer stroke diabetes and dementia and become a priority for many governments in both developed and developing nations. Longevity should also propel strong consumption growth worldwide in the years ahead. The emerging market consumer will likely represent key drivers of economic growth and corporate earnings in such global sectors as technology health care energy travel and leisure and transportation. Internet retail and digital payment systems may also benefit owing to rising internet penetration rates and the proliferation of mobile devices. Climate Change Climate change and extreme weather conditions have taken a toll on the planet and are broadly acknowledged as the number one global risk. As an example the five warmest years on record were all in the 2010s and came at considerable cost The price tag for the frequency and severity of heat waves hurricanes floods and droughts in 2017 alone was $306 billion.5 Three quarters of the people with crisis levels of food insecurity have also been affected by extreme weather which can impair food production. Coastal areas are also being affected by rising water levels as the polar ice caps melt due to warmer temperatures. As governments communities and corporations respond look for investment opportunities in flood abatement more efficient farming technologies carbon sequestration electric vehicles air conditioning alternative energy sources clean water and more. The world is on a trajectory to not only become warmer but hungrier and dirtier. Consider this 76 of people with crisis levels of food insecurity have also been affected by extreme weather as it becomes more difficult to provide the world with food in extreme temperatures. Rising per capita incomes among a burgeoning middle class combined with greater urbanization is leading to more consumption of mass produced goods and a mountain of global garbage and waste products like food waste cardboard plastics glass industrial waste scrap metals food waste eWaste electronic waste . The level of solid waste produced each year is expected to reach 6.1 million tons per day by 2025 according to estimates from the World Bank. Waste generation tends not to rise or fall materially due to changes in economic conditions. For that reason investment implications for this theme pivot around pure waste management and recycling plays water utilities and water treatment companies infrastructure material and industrial companies green energy management and smart cities. Privacy and Cybersecurity Some 18 billion connected devices 4 billion internet users 3 billion social media accounts the amount of data exchanged over the internet increased by 22 in 2016 alone with the total expected to double by the end of the decade. The more data available the greater the opportunities for hackers and data thieves. Indeed the cost of cybercrime is set to grow to $6 trillion by 2021 as more people come online per user data consumption increases and attack threats become more mainstream and sophisticated.6 This stark reality will generate opportunities in protecting the global digital economy in anti virus software against malware the largest sector of attacks Internet of Things IoT protection payment processing and user data fraud verification. Learn More About Investment Management Explore More Insights 