 How Bank of America Private Bank and Bank of America Protect Your Personal Information Active monitoring of accounts by specially trained Bank of America Private Bank employees. For instance if a client sends a wire overseas for the first time or logs in from another country the advisor will call the client. State of the art online security when accessing your accounts on Bank of America Private Bank Account Access iPad iPhone or Apple Watch Apps. Your login process is safeguarded by a combination of user ID password and an optional electronic one time passcode. Touch ID is available for iPad and iPhone logins. Security questions and answers also help to protect you against unauthorized attempts to access your accounts. SafePass is an additional service that offers an extra layer of protection for Online Banking and is complimentary for Bank of America Private Bank clients. For more information on how Bank of America protects client information click here. How You Can Help Protect Your Information Go green. If you are still receiving paper statements you may want to consider switching to electronic delivery. This can help guard against identity theft resulting from interception of mail. Review who has access to your account information. You may wish to make changes to or limit the number of people who can access details of your Bank of America Private Bank accounts. Be aware of potential email fraud such as Phishing. Phishing is a type of email fraud where an individual receives an email that looks like it comes from Bank of America Private Bank or Bank of America but in fact does not. These emails often ask you to click a link and enter your account number. If you receive a suspicious email do not respond. Either delete it or forward it to abuse bankofamerica.com or contact your client team. ATM safety. Be aware of your surroundings. Don t open locked ATM vestibule doors for others and shield the keypad with your hand when entering your PIN. We value our relationship with our clients and want you to know that we share your concern for the protection of your personal and account information. LEARN MORE ABOUT US EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 