 Our experts go beyond the headlines to examine the forces that are changing our world and how they impact our lives. China the Global Smartphone Economy Episode Length 25 29 The smartphone in your hand is assembled from a universe of rare elements sophisticated circuits and software mostly in China. But it s not who puts it together it s who makes the smartphone smart that will drive the future of the global economy. Find out why that matters to all of us. Learn More Surviving Immortality Episode Length 21 44 Could someone alive today actually live to be 1 000 years old Thanks to medical and technological breakthroughs that could be possible someday. But living longer even if it s only to say 150 comes with financial implications for how we plan and invest for our futures. Learn More Cyber Security Episode Length 22 14 From our social media accounts to our medical records much of our most personal information is readily available online. But who has access to it and how can we protect ourselves from the growing threat of cyber crime We explore the challenges and offer guidance for keeping our digital lives safe. Learn More Women Ri$ing Episode Length 23 01 Women have made enormous economic and social gains in recent years. We look at the progress they ve made where there s room for growth and how the unique financial journeys many women travel require a different approach to saving investing and planning for the future. Learn More Getting Schooled Episode Length 21 33 The rising cost of college can make it feel more high pressure than ever. In Getting Schooled our hosts examine how families can plan and prepare ahead so it doesn t feel so overwhelming and also look at some potential alternatives to a traditional college degree. Learn More A World Apart Episode Length 18 41 In many respects the U.S. economy is in the best shape it s been in years so why is the rest of the world slowing down We take a trip around the world to look for answers and also explore global trends that could offer promising opportunities. Learn More Bulls Bears and Volatility Episode Length 17 14 Markets often go through periods when they zoom up and down. But does this volatility mean a bear market is on the way and what s the best way for investors to react In Bulls Bears and Volatility our hosts explain what it means for all of us. Learn More Growth Town U.S.A. Episode Length 17 29 What s driving the growth of the U.S. economy and can it keep going We look at cities reinventing themselves across America to explore the innovative entrepreneurial spirit of the country and what it could mean for your financial future. Learn More Good Tech Bad Tech Episode Length 20 57 We ve got robots making us coffee but are we better off From automation to longer lives we look at how technology is changing daily life and the economy for good and bad. Learn More 