 Bank of America Private Bank s Philanthropic Solutions group can help you anticipate and address your nonprofit organization s needs. We complement our dedicated investment teams missionbased approach to investment management with ongoing guidance on best practices in mission advancement leadership development and fiduciary review and support. At a time when many nonprofit organizations are faced with an aging donor base and are trying to cultivate new support increasing attention is turning to an emergent group of new leaders and influencers millennials. According to Pew Research Center millennials are on track to become the largest U.S. generation in 2019 with immigration adding more numbers to this group than any other. This population is increasingly being defined as people born from the early 1980s to 1996 with anyone born from 1997 onward being part of a new generation.1 Additional research by the Case Foundation states that millennials use similar methods to engage in philanthropy as other generations but the motivations behind their involvement often differ. 2Millennials tend to be tech savvy and entrepreneurial and they frequently look to engage with nonprofits on multiple levels preferring to use their unique skill sets as well as their money. While earning power is increasing a 2015 study by Accenture estimates that millennials stand to inherit more than $30 trillion in North America alone over the next 30 years.3 According to the 2018 U.S. Trust Study of High Net Worth Philanthropy 84 of millennials are giving to charitable organizations. Millennial donors were 44 nonwhite in 2017 making them the most diverse group of donors.4 As organizations seek to work with millennials it is increasingly important for them to determine clear strategies for leveraging both in kind and monetary contributions through social media outreach peer networking events e newsletters and face toface engagement. By developing programming that integrates millennials into the mission of the organization while also providing leadership opportunities nonprofits offer millennials the opportunity to gain a holistic perspective of organizational operations including development strategies programming and governance procedures. If done with intention these engagements can translate to meaningful long term involvement to the benefit of both nonprofits and their millennial donors. In thinking about program and leadership engagement opportunities for millennials nonprofits should consider tailoring their approach to fit the key motivations of millennials. According to the Bank of America Private Bank Philanthropic Solutions team tips for engagement include 5 Think small Millennials generally prefer to ease into relationships with organizations before fully committing to a cause so organizations should consider creating opportunities to pull them into their programming early on in ways that may not require full fledged commitment. The initial engagement such as volunteering at a specific event or program participating in a single fundraising initiative or attending a board recruitment event should offer millennials the ability to better understand the mission organizational structure and desired impact of the nonprofit. Make space Organizations should consider examining their leadership structure to find ways to make room on their boards committees and volunteer programs for millennials to have the ability to actively participate in a manner that feels meaningful to them. Millennial donors feel a personal sense of social responsibility that helps enable them to be engaged with an organization on many levels. To harness this strength nonprofits should consider involving millennials in the development and implementation of concrete initiatives through appropriate committees and leadership positions. While all donors should be treated with high levels of attention from staff development professionals should thoughtfully work to engage millennials in the institution prior to making any ask. For this group feeling a sense of ownership can lead to an ongoing fruitful relationship. Give results Perhaps most important organizations can help millennials understand the tangible impact of the investment of their time money and knowledge. A key differentiator between previous generations and millennials is an emphasis on measured impact millennials tend to look for full transparency into how their philanthropic investment is moving the needle for an organization pushing organizations to show clear metrics that resonate in order to keep them highly engaged. Get social Many millennials tend to be deeply connected to the world and their peers through social media vehicles such as Facebook Twitter and Instagram. Their social media presence offers nonprofits not only unique and valuable insight into millennial giving patterns and social interest areas but also the opportunity to reach and influence this group. Organizations should consider approaching their social media with the same methodical intent as they would a development strategy. A committee may want to get involved led by a social media coordinator who adheres to policies and procedures and builds out a detailed plan that is approved by the board and executive leadership. The committee may then want to conduct a social media landscape assessment of the available channels to determine where they believe they can have the greatest impact. From there the organization should consider implementing the strategy by leveraging captivating content and examining the initial metrics likes followers subscribers and dollars to adjust the strategy as necessary. Staying nimble and flexible in the strategy will help enable the organization to adapt to the ever changing environment and capitalize on key moments to engage. How we can help The National Consulting and Advisory Practice team works closely with our nonprofit clients to offer strategic support and guidance in how to engage millennials as thoughtful and impactful donors supportive and educated board and committee members and overall strong advocates for the organization through our extensive experience advising nonprofit clients. We understand the challenges our nonprofit clients face when working to meaningfully engage with millennials and can work with your organization to determine strategies and solutions for reaching this demographic as donors volunteers advocates and leaders. 