 Transcript Close Transcript On screen copy Invested in You Family Wealth Strategy Katy Knox Behind your family s wealth is a story. The innovation behind it the opportunities it unlocks and the impact on the world. On screen copy Katy Knox President of Bank of America Private Bank Katy Knox This is the enduring legacy that carries through the generations. That s why we apply the same abundance of talent and rigorous investment process to your family strategy as we do our institutional clients. On screen copy Nancy Kistner Wealth Strategy Executive Nancy Kistner We start with you and your family as the centerpiece. What s important to you and how can we educate your children to carry on your values. Next we ll work together to create a blueprint that outlines the current state of your wealth then play out different scenarios to see how your lifestyle can affect other factors such as taxes or gifting. On screen copy Chris Hyzy Chief Investment Officer Chris Hyzy Our high conviction thought and insight is what drives our strategy but what truly makes our approach special is the boots on the ground field research. We meet with countless clients to understand their needs challenges and what drives their thinking. Many of them are entrepreneurs who manage businesses in all corners of the world. This gives us the opportunity to assess the real economy as new trends and themes develop from year to year. On screen copy Ken Shepard Head of Wealth and Portfolio Strategy Group Ken Shepard Our collective insights help us determine how to allocate your assets which fund and managers have earned the right to be a part of your strategy and which investment strategies to include from individual stocks to alternative assets. Disclosure Impact investing and or Environmental Social and Governance ESG managers may take into consideration factors beyond traditional financial information to select securities which could result in relative investment performance deviating from other strategies or broad market benchmarks depending on whether such sectors or investments are in or out of favor in the market. Further ESG strategies may rely on certain values based criteria to eliminate exposures found in similar strategies or broad market benchmarks which could also result in relative investment performance deviating. Ken Shepard Then we stress test your portfolio to understand and prepare for how it could react in different markets and scenarios. On screen copy Nancy Fahmy Alternative Investments Executive Nancy Fahmy Moving beyond stocks and bonds can help you diversify your portfolio protect against volatility or accelerate growth. Disclosure Alternative investments such as derivatives hedge funds private equity funds and funds of funds can result in higher return potential but also higher loss potential. Changes in economic conditions or other circumstances may adversely affect your investments. Before you invest in alternative investments you should consider your overall financial situation how much money you have to invest your need for liquidity and your tolerance for risk. Alternative investments are intended for qualified and suitable investors only. Nancy Fahmy Our alternative investment and specialty asset management platform can be an important part of your portfolio. And our solutions are flexible so you can find opportunities to help meet your liquidity needs and risk tolerance. On screen copy Mike Pelzar Head of National Trust Services Mike Pelzar We execute your strategy under a fiduciary standard which is an important differentiator. Disclosure Bank of America N.A. and U.S. Trust Company of Delaware collectively the Bank do not serve in fiduciary capacity with respect to all products or services. Fiduciary standards of fiduciary duties do not apply for example when the Bank if offering or providing credit solutions banking custody or brokerage products services or referrals to other affiliates of the Bank. Mike Pelzar It means that our actions are focused on your best interests. By monitoring and measuring your progress we help you take advantage of additional opportunities along the way while keeping your investments aligned with your long term purpose. Katy Knox We know there s a lot at stake in helping to preserve grow and manage your wealth. We look forward to getting to know you and learning more about your family s aspirations. On screen copy Bank of America Private Bank logo BankofAmerica.com PrivateBank Disclosure IMPORTANT INFORMATION Opinions expressed herein are those of the featured participants and may differ from those of Bank of America Corporation and its affiliates. The information presented in this video is for discussion purposes only and is not intended to serve as a recommendation or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any type of security. This video does not constitute investment advice and is issued without regard to specific investment objectives or the financial situation of any particular recipient. This video is designed to provide general information about ideas and strategies. Always consult with your independent attorney tax advisor investment manager and insurance agent for final recommendations and before changing or implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. Investment products Are Not FDIC Insured Are Not Bank Guaranteed May Lose Value Bank of America Private Bank is a division of Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation. Bank of America N.A. and U.S. Trust Company of Delaware collectively the Bank do not serve in a fiduciary capacity with respect to all products or services. Fiduciary standards or fiduciary duties do not apply for example when the Bank is offering or providing credit solutions banking custody or brokerage products services or referrals to other affiliates of the Bank. 2019 Bank of America Corporation. All rights reserved. The video introduces investment leaders of Bank of America Private Bank and showcases the investment process and expanded capabilities we offer to help prospects in all life stages. Learn More about Investment Management Explore More Insights 