 Transcript Close Transcript On screen copy Servicing our Clients Together Ann Limberg It s been such an exciting time for our business. On screen copy Ann Limberg Head of Philanthropic Family Office Solutions Ann Limberg There is so much happening in the philanthropic space and we ve been working with so many great new clients both individuals and families and institutions. On screen copy Karen Reynolds Sharkey National Business Owner Strategy Executive On screen copy Evan Beard Art Services Executive Ann Limberg I mean so much wealth that s been created and now they re looking to really put that wealth to work. I mean you re seeing that every day in the work you do with business owners right Karen Karen Reynolds Sharkey Yeah we re working with a lot of business owners really thinking about how they give within the company back to the communities where they reside but also what do they want to do personally with their legacy with their family and thinking through that and really thinking through with their children what is that next chapter It s a very exciting time but you re also seeing that with a lot of our art collectors Evan. Evan Beard Yeah look this day and age the art collectors are at an intersection of both your philanthropic universe as well as so many of them are business owners they re unlocking capital to do some strategic gifting but at the core so many of our clients are really legacy minded. Ann Limberg They are. They re focused on stewardship right They want to make sure that they re good stewards of this wealth and that their children the next generation are in a great position to be stewards. Evan Beard No it s so true and so many of them we re working with them on forming the family foundation and putting that art strategy in place where the art collection will go will it go to auction will it be bequested to a museum maybe transitioned to the next generation. Legacy really is a key issue. Ann Limberg And we see that next generation sitting on boards all over the place and so decision making is really changing. We re in a perfect position today I think to help advise those boards on their governance and think about how they tell their story in a fresh and a modern way. We re seeing women change that game everywhere. Karen Reynolds Sharkey We re seeing a lot of that with women business owners whether they are starting their companies or if they ve been managing it for 20 years really thinking about how they re going to give but also they re thinking about their family and do they want to keep that business in the family or do they want to think about potentially selling it to a third party and what does that mean We help a lot with business owners in the years leading up to a transition how they can help plan for the family and the business because our business owners think of their family and their company as one and we come to them as one also as a team. So it s an exciting time to be working with our clients across all three of our areas. On screen copy Bank of America Private Bank Logo IMPORTANT INFORMATION Opinions expressed herein are those of the featured participants and may differ from those of Bank of America Corporation and its affiliates. The information presented in this video is for discussion purposes only and is not intended to serve as a recommendation or solicitation for the purchase or sale of any type of security. This video does not constitute investment advice and is issued without regard to specific investment objectives or the financial situation of any particular recipient. This video is designed to provide general information about ideas and strategies. Always consult with your independent attorney tax advisor investment manager and insurance agent for final recommendations and before changing or implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. Investment products Are Not FDIC Insured Are Not Bank Guaranteed May Lose Value Bank of America Private Bank is a division of Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation. Bank of America N.A. and U.S. Trust Company of Delaware collectively the Bank do not serve in a fiduciary capacity with respect to all products or services. Fiduciary standards or fiduciary duties do not apply for example when the Bank is offering or providing credit solutions banking custody or brokerage products services or referrals to other affiliates of the Bank. 2019 Bank of America Corporation. All rights reserved. Our leaders for our Philanthropy Business Owner and Art Services capabilities came together to discuss how we work across segments to bring the best of Bank of America to our clients and the communities where we work. Learn More About Our Solutions 