 At Bank of America Private Bank we maintain a keen focus on the art market and on the collectors dealers auctions specialists and institutions that make it function. We work closely with many of you across four pillars art lending art planning consignment services and arts institutional endowment management. What follows are observations on the state of the art market from a business perspective. The Market Current low interest rates solid equity markets and more stratified wealth creation worldwide continues to drive capital towards art. The maturation and globalization of the art market has expanded the collector base and transformed the art market from a niche lifestyle into a $60 billion global industry1. Still overall art market growth in terms of total art sales has stalled since 2012 even as the S P 500 has currently more than doubled since that time. If the Federal Reserve Fed continues its dovish policy we expect collectors continued allocation of capital to art. When interest rates fall the opportunity cost of holding non interest bearing assets like art goes down. The art market is driven by sentiment so the greatest risk we see is a geo political event that impedes the global flow of capital and credit prompting collectors to pause. We anticipate that financial returns for contemporary art will be lower over the next decade than some may expect. The market has absorbed a lot of art since the turn of the century. An exceedingly large percentage of those works may be worth close to zero in a generation or so. And because we re in a more mature and efficient art market there may be fewer upside surprises than in decades past. We feel that you should not buy art purely as an investment. Buy it for love desire legacy culture pleasure addiction status and community. We feel that you should not buy art purely as an investment. Buy it for love desire legacy culture pleasure addiction status and community. The Auctions During the New York Spring Auctions the market absorbed over $2 billion of art at Christie s Sotheby s and Phillips handily above the $1.6 billion presale estimate. It was the first auction season defined by large estates of post war and contemporary art. Eye catching results such as the $91 million Koons Rabbit the $110 million Monet Haystack and the rapidly growing market for KAWS belie a more modest 5.1 annualized return2 achieved for repeat sales during the season. Given recent performance of London auctions and the lack of clarity around a Brexit deal New York will continue to be the premiere sale site for high end post war and contemporary art for the foreseeable future. Fresh to market works typical of the artist s oeuvre in good condition with strong provenance continue to perform strongest at auction. Works by female and black artists continue also their rise. You likely saw that in June Sotheby s accepted a $3.7 billion buyout offer from French media entrepreneur Patrick Drahi. Interestingly Bonhams was also bought out earlier this year. Going private will allow Sotheby s more flexibility to compete for top lots which will benefit major collectors and will provide time and space to evolve its business model which like Christie s is challenged. Competition for top pictures has become a race to the bottom China isn t the growth engine everyone hoped it would be and online sales have yet to deliver meaningful scale or margin expansion. With business margins at around 10 for the industry auction houses are officially on the hunt for new revenue streams. Look for the auction houses to continue to expand into art advisory financial services brand licensing and even investment research as they look beyond their supply constrained auction business. As a collector you may see better terms when consigning top works at auction but expect higher commissions for lower value works. Buyer premiums will continue to expand at all levels. Finally get ready for more convenience. Virtual reality will change how you view upcoming sales and artificial intelligence will soon be sending you an endless array of Netflix style lot recommendations across all categories based on what you ve perused across the internet. We re currently in the age of the collector. The Collector We re currently in the age of the collector. The art market is now a solar system where dealers museums auction specialists art advisors and private bankers orbit around the gravitational pull of the collector. You now join top dealers and museum executives as lead actors taste drivers and status makers. One major gallerist told us that he used to collect artists and now he collects collectors. The industries producing the greatest number of new art collectors are Private Equity Hedge Fund and Real Estate. This new guard tends to view their collection as an extension of their financial life. They unlock capital from their art to redeploy elsewhere pay attention to tax implications and incorporate their art early on into legacy planning. The new collector also is increasingly willing to sell on the way up. Collectors aren t sellers will soon no longer be a thing. The new enterprising collector understands that an artist s influence on other artists drives price in the long run. We ve noticed more collectors promoting the artists they collect strategically collaborating with museums and taking a more active role in an artist s career. Museums now priced out of the market have become more receptive to partnering with collectors early in their journey. Rising collectors still go to lengths to show they re not purely investors. They market themselves quietly to dealers work with reputable art advisors acquire non commercial works such as installations and become trustees of the local museum or arts institution all to signal that they will not flip a hot artist at auction. Art Fairs Dealers we spoke to following the most recent edition of Art Basel said it was their strongest fair ever. The art market has become event driven. We expect the major art fairs to become increasingly critical nodes for the primary and even the secondary art market. Galleries tell us that now almost 50 of their annual sales stem from art fairs which benefit from two behavioral impulses. Induced scarcity art fairs are ephemeral and high stakes encouraging you to make snap decisions. And the sunk cost fallacy you feel obligated to acquire if you ve trekked to Basel Maastricht or Hong Kong. With over 300 fairs globally the majors like Basel Frieze and TEFAF are aiming to solidify their status as dominant umbrella brands that the satellite fairs will increasingly be tethered to.Earlier this year MCH Group the parent of Art Basel sold its stake in Art Dusseldorf to focus on its tent pole fairs in Basel Hong Kong and Miami. In February Frieze expanded beyond London Hong Kong and New York into L.A. as its parent company Endeavor run by Hollywood super agent Ari Emanuel filed for IPO. TEFAF Maastricht long an exemplar of sophistication has quickly solidified its spot on the calendar with two New York editions which we sponsor. Art and Technology The art market remains one of the few industries still largely undisrupted by technology. We re seeing innovation but it s still at the fringes. While online transactions are increasing the growth of online sales has slowed growing at 9.8 in 2018 versus 12 in 2017.3 Internet native art companies are trying to help. In June private equity firm Cove Hill made an investment in online marketplace LiveAuctioneers aiming to accelerate online sales growth for their auction house partners while Invaluable has made it easier to source and buy lower value items. Major galleries like Gagosian and David Zwirner launched digital sales channels. But the digital revolution still eludes the art world. On the transparency front Christie s became the first major auction house to record sales via Blockchain with the sale of the Ebsworth collection in November. At the request of the Seller Christie s partnered with Blockchain secured registry Artory to record its transactions. It s an interesting development but we re a long way from Blockchain becoming industry standard. The most significant art world technology has been the rise of Instagram. Artists market themselves museums announce exhibits dealers initiate sales and collectors tout their purchases through the platform. In 2017 when the Untitled Basquiat sold at Sotheby s for over $110 million Yusaku Maezawa posted his photo on Instagram to let the world know of his acquisition. Younger collectors artists dealers and auction specialists are increasingly using Instagram to enhance their personal and professional brands. Expect the new status loop to fuel a herd mentality for some artists and more price volatility. So collector beware. Top 5 artists we lend against by value Willem de Kooning Andy Warhol Constantin Brancusi Paul Cezanne Roy Lichtenstein Art Lending Our art lending business grew by 20 year over year as you all continue to unlock capital from your art to build hotels buy sports franchises expand companies and even buy more art just to name a few. The four most common situations we re seeing are. The balance sheet arbitrage With historically low interest rates more of you are unlocking capital from your art to redeploy into higher return areas of your financial life like private equity. Working capital line During the current economic expansion more of you are using art loans to fund the growth of your privately held companies. Monetizing a collection The passage of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act Act eliminated the 1031 Like Kind Exchange making it more expensive to sell art. Instead of selling art and dealing with paying the 28 federal tax 3.8 healthcare surtax State taxes sales commission many of you have chosen to leverage your art via an art line to generate liquidity. Guarantees Finally we re seeing more of you using art facilities to back guarantees at auction just be careful . We estimate that total U.S. art loan commitments stand at $16 billion. We re proud to have significant portion of those loans and we remain staunchly committed to the space. Given our forecast of continued low interest rates stratified wealth creation and expansion of the collector base we expect continued growth in the space. Opportunity Zones Capital gains tax on the sale of artwork is high up to 28 on the federal level plus 3.8 healthcare surtax plus applicable state income tax. Many of you qualified to use Section 1031 like kind exchanges which indefinitely deferred your federal capital gains and healthcare surtax. The 2017 Tax Act repealed that provision for all taxpayers except for real estate investors. An unrelated provision allowing a temporary deferral and partial elimination of capital gains has caught the attention of the art world Opportunity Zones. These are designated low income areas across the country and Puerto Rico in which taxpayers may invest capital gains and receive the following tax benefits Federal capital gain timely reinvested in an Opportunity Zone investment is deferred until the earlier of the sale of the Opportunity Zone investment or December 31 2026 If the Opportunity Zone investment is held for 5 years before 12 31 26 then 10 of the original capital gain is eliminated if the Opportunity Zone investment is held for 7 years before 12 31 2026 then an additional 5 is eliminated. The remaining gain will be recognized on December 31 2026 subject to certain adjustments and If the Opportunity Zone investment itself is held for at least 10 years but sold before the end of 2047 any gain on the Opportunity Zone investment itself is avoided altogether. This benefit may prove most beneficial to investors. By way of example say you purchased a Jeff Koons Balloon Animal for $1 Million years ago and decided to sell it now for let s say $21 Million. The federal tax on that $20 Million gain would be $6.36 Million. You could invest part or all of your gain in an Opportunity Zone investment defer the gain until December 31 2026 eliminate 15 of the original gain and most important if the Opportunity Zone investment appreciates avoid any capital gains tax on that investment. Sales Tax As states feel pressure to collect more revenue some have increasingly focused on sales and use tax collection efforts. The auction houses and reputable art galleries are experts in sales and use taxes. There have been several high profile sales tax cases in recent years some involving criminal charges. So do not get fancy here heed the advice of the experts Art Services at Bank of America Private Bank Art lending Art planning Consignment services Nonprofit services Leverage your collection to generate capital Incorporate art and collectibles into your overall estate and financial plan according to your unique needs Arrange for the sale of art and collectibles through our partnerships with auction houses Utilize our bespoke consulting and investment management services for museums foundations and institutions To learn more about how we can help you manage and protect your collection or understand how our institutional services can benefit your organization contact your private client advisor or the Bank of America Private Bank Art Services group at 646.855.1107. Visit privatebank.bankofamerica.com art for more information. Bank of America Corporation s commitment to the arts Bank of America Corporation s arts and culture program reflects its belief that the arts matter. Bank of America Corporation supports nonprofit arts institutions globally that deliver visual and performing arts educate and inspire anchor communities create jobs and sustain local businesses. Through our Art in Our Communities program Bank of America Corporation has lent more than 100 full exhibitions to nonprofit museums throughout the world at no cost. Museums in 28 countries have preserved nearly 100 works of historic and cultural significance through Bank of America Corporation s Art Conservation Project. For individual patrons the Museums on Us program has let millions of people enjoy no cost admission to popular cultural institutions. Learn more about our commitment to the arts at bankofamerica.com arts. 1 The Art Market Report 2019. 2 Sotheby s Mei Moses Index. As of June 2019. 3 Deloitte Art and Finance Report 2018. Global Wealth Investment Management GWIM is a division of Bank of America Corporation. The Chief Investment Office which provides investment strategies due diligence portfolio construction guidance and wealth management solutions for GWIM clients is part of the Investment Solutions Group ISG of GWIM. Neither Bank of America Private Bank nor any of its affiliates or advisors provide legal tax or accounting advice. You should consult your legal and or tax advisors before making any financial decisions. Investing involves risk including the possible loss of principal. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. All recommendations must be considered in the context of an individual investor s goals time horizon liquidity needs and risk tolerance. Not all recommendations will be suitable for all investors. Asset allocation and diversification do not ensure a profit or protect against loss in declining markets. It is not possible to invest directly in an index. S P 500 Index includes a representative sample of 500 leading companies in leading industries of the U.S. economy. Although the index focuses on the large cap segment of the market with approximately 75 coverage of U.S. equities it is also an ideal proxy for the total market. The investments or strategies presented do not take into account the investment objectives or financial needs of particular investors. It is important that you consider this information in the context of your personal risk tolerance and investment goals before making an investment decision. Investments have varying degrees of risk. Some of the risks involved with equity securities include the possibility that the value of the stocks may fluctuate in response to events specific to the companies or markets as well as economic political or social events in the U.S. or abroad. Investments in foreign securities including ADRs involve special risks including foreign currency risk and the possibility of substantial volatility due to adverse political economic or other developments. These risks are magnified for investments made in emerging markets. Investments in a certain industry or sector may pose additional risk due to lack of diversification and sector concentration. As of July 2 2018 there is uncertainty regarding the Opportunity Zone program as the US Department of the Treasury has not released guidance on many of the questions left open by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017. These open questions include but are not limited to a what kinds of gains other than capital gains if any can be properly rolled into an Opportunity Fund b how much time an opportunity fund will have to deploy the capital it has raised c tax treatment of gains in an opportunity fund pass through partnership etc. Accordingly the foregoing discussion of the various aspects of the Opportunity Zone program is based upon positions that we believe to be reasonable given the statute as currently written and prior Treasury and IRS precedent however there can be no assurance that the forgoing discussion will ultimately prove to be correct as Treasury begins issuing guidance and regulations on the Opportunity Zone program. Given such uncertainty each prospective investor should consult with their personal tax advisors before making any investment into an opportunity fund. Art Services We provide solutions for collectors and institutions while helping to navigate the complex art world. Article Your Art Collection As Loan Collateral Article Your Art Collection And Legacy Planning 