 Many families delay difficult discussions until a health crisis hits. But with life expectancy on the rise and the cost of long term care steadily increasing the time to start the conversation may be now. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Communication and preparation are key ingredients for executing a successful plan. Planning Early ISSUES RELATED TO your family s future health and wellness can have an impact on every aspect of your life. Addressing those issues sooner rather than later makes good sense. For example having a dialogue with your loved ones as early as possible to uncover gaps in your planning and making sure your wishes are known and fully understood can reduce everyone s anxiety about what the future may hold. A family health crisis of any kind be it a catastrophic physical health issue acute or gradual cognitive decline or a death in the family typically requires open communication and the sharing of key information so everyone can be on the same page and know what to expect. Not planning for the future and not sharing the appropriate information with family members and loved ones is a recipe for family conflict that can negatively affect your family s financial resources and interpersonal relationships and may result in the loss of planning options. Communication and preparation are key ingredients for executing a successful plan that relies on other people to carry out your preferences. The mere act of thoughtfully preparing for this type of conversation with loved ones can be the most important step to achieving your goals and avoiding some of the pitfalls that can result from being caught off guard. It can allow you to examine what s really important to you and to reflect upon how your wishes may affect your loved ones. One of the best ways to lay the groundwork for holding these discussions can be to enlist your private wealth advisor to help you map out the issues you have identified and together develop a strategy for sharing your ideas and concerns with your family. After input from advisors people often determine the best approach is to have separate discussions with different family members each tailored to that person s capacity to fully appreciate the importance and gravity of putting a well thought out plan in place. Typically conversations should take place every three to five years or sooner should you and your family reach milestones along the way. This guide is designed to help you engage in effective conversations with your advisors and loved ones. Remember these types of discussions should happen every three to five years to reflect changes in your family balance sheet and your current wishes. If on the other hand you have identified a serious medical issue that may seriously affect your ongoing health quality of life and perhaps shortened your actual life expectancy your wealth and health care planning documents should be reviewed as soon as possible. In the unfortunate circumstance where your life expectancy may be shortened by a medical issue our firm has developed a special white paper titled Wealth Planning for Shortened Life Expectancies and Aging Family Members that we recommend you read and share with family and advisors. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Eight Planning Elements Don t know where to start when it comes to planning for the financial future of yourself and your loved ones The Eight C s can help you identify opportunities and potential roadblocks in the planning process effectively socialize the subject matter with your family and incorporate your values and wishes into a sound long term wellness plan and a long lasting legacy. When planning for the future it may be necessary to talk not only with your attorney and private client advisor but with your accountant insurance specialist and primary physician as well. Collaborate with your advisors family members and loved ones to discuss your long term goals and concerns. Consult with your advisors to make sure your health and estate planning documents are up to date and reflect your current wishes. It may be necessary to talk not only with your attorney and private client advisor but with your accountant insurance specialist and primary physician as well. Consider whom to name as your executor trustee guardian health care agent and agent under your durable power of attorney Create a comprehensive list that includes a current balance sheet health insurance policies long term care policies life insurance policies and the contact information for your primary physician private client advisor lawyer accountant and insurance specialist. Collect all key legal documents as well as your financial and online information and compile a list indicating where they are kept or stored or who may be in possession of them including but not limited to Insurance policies Bank accounts and credit card information Mortgages and other lines of credit Titles deeds and registrations Prior income and gift tax returns Online accounts and passwords Will trust agreements living Will health care proxy and power of attorney Safe deposit box keys Concentrate on business related issues such as management succession planning. Check all documents to ensure their accuracy and continued relevance. Communicate when appropriate your desired goals to family members loved ones and key advisors. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Starting the Conversation Many people fully embrace the planning process but do so privately. They may take action but they do this without informing spouses or partners who are then left in the dark until their loved one is ill. Talking about your wishes for health care and your estate can be challenging and in some families discussing issues involving mortality is taboo. The reality is by 2030 when the last of the baby boomers has turned 65 one in every five Americans or about 72 million people will be an older adult.1 And though the current average life expectancy in the United States is 79 years those who live to age 65 have a much greater chance of living another 20 years. One of the negatives of longevity is people delay the planning process because they assume they re going to live a long time says Mitchell Drossman national director of Wealth Planning Strategies at Bank of America Private Bank. Yet the longer they wait the greater the chance cognitive decline or an unexpected illness could compromise their ability to manage their own affairs or effectively direct another person to manage their affairs. Typically conversations should take place every three to five years or sooner should you and your family reach milestones along the way. Despite initial trepidation many families who have had these conversations have had a positive experience and now feel prepared for whatever the future may bring. The earlier you start the less emotionally charged the topic of severe illness or the end of your life can be says Gregory B. Cerbone chief fiduciary officer at Bank of America Private Bank What can happen if you don t do any planning To start your wishes may not be carried out. You may not receive the medical care you want and in some cases the state in which you live could determine what type of care you receive and who is to inherit your estate. On the flip side planning now can be a positive rewarding experience. It can help you focus on what s really important to you and let you narrow down the seemingly limitless options available. Your planning can inspire others in your family to do the same and encourage them to have similar discussions and take similar precautions. As with other aspects of your life there s no one size fits all approach to designing your health or estate plans. Each individual is unique and therefore so is each event and thus each plan. With that said we believe the following sections of this paper should provide you with a framework for you to begin developing your own unique plan. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Creating a Plan To whom and how you dispose of your property is the foundation of your estate plan. Personal wishes will be your most important guidepost. What you own and how you own it will determine how you pass property to others. However bequests and dispositions likely will be shaped by tax considerations. Even if tax considerations are not pertinent the choice between outright bequests or transfers in trust may depend on a beneficiary s age maturity and many other non tax factors. Once this architecture is in place you will need to consider naming executors to administer and settle your estate trustees to manage and invest trust assets and perhaps guardians to care for minor children. WHEN EQUAL ISN T FAIR Some of the most difficult planning choices arise when deciding how to divide assets among children. Even leaving equal amounts could seem unfair in some situations. Consider for example a Will that leaves assets to two children one of whom is a high earning business executive while the other is a lower earning teacher in a public school. The teacher may resent the sibling for receiving an equal share because the business professional is in a better financial position. On the other hand the executive might come to feel punished for her success if she does not receive an equal share. In Wills I ve seen on almost every occasion when property is not left equally to children people put one sentence in the Will and unfortunately it s I have intentionally left an unequal disposition but there s no further explanation as to the testator s reasoning says Mitchell Drossman national director of Wealth Planning Strategies at Bank of America Private Bank. There are several different tools you can use to avoid leaving heirs with bad feelings as to their inheritance. Perhaps the most simple thing to do is have a discussion with your children about your thought process. If having this type of discussion during your life won t work for your family consider leaving them a letter to be read in conjunction with your Will explains Drossman. Transparency during the testator s life can be a double edged sword especially if the testator changes his or her mind over time. However transparency at death can help to alleviate potential conflicts between your heirs. While transparency is important when communicating the intent and purpose of wealth wealth creators may not wish to communicate the specifics of asset distribution or the potential size of such distributions. Estate plans like wealth often change over time and revealing too much too early can lead to unmet expectations yet revealing too little can result in hurt feelings or even animosity toward other recipients. Fiduciaries You can take specific steps to help ensure your health and financial wishes are carried out following your incapacity or death by naming an individual or institution as your fiduciary. A fiduciary has a legal obligation to carry out certain tasks on your behalf. Fiduciaries are held to a high standard of conduct in carrying out their duties. The choice of fiduciaries is one of the most important decisions you ll ever make. And while naming an individual as a fiduciary can be viewed as an honor you bestow on a trusted family member or friend it s important to keep in mind that the title comes with serious responsibilities and potential personal liability for breaching those responsibilities. Serving as a fiduciary can require an individual to devote significant amounts of time to carrying out the role. Even a layperson will need to be aware of what a prudent fiduciary should know and will be expected to act accordingly. Fiduciaries are held to a high standard of conduct in carrying out their duties. Similarly who you select to act as your health care agent should you suffer a temporary or permanent disability and lose the capacity to make critical decisions is something to seriously consider. Another important decision is who you might select as an agent or attorney in fact under a durable power of attorney to make financial decisions for you if you are unable to do so because of an illness or other reasons. Like fiduciaries these roles carry with them enormous responsibilities and are also positions of trust so you will need to choose wisely who will fill them. Fiduciaries to consider Remember the fiduciary you choose can have a significant impact on whether the terms of your Will or trusts are effectively implemented and fulfilled. Keep in mind an executor may have an important role but it may be limited in duration. A trustee s role may be narrower in scope but could last many years e.g. for the life of a beneficiary. These types of considerations along with many other factors can help you select the right individuals or organizations for the proper roles. Executor personal representative When preparing your Will one of the important decisions is choosing an executor in some jurisdictions referred to as a personal representative who can be an individual fiduciary and or a corporate fiduciary. Your executor will have a duty to collect and preserve your assets pay your final bills file your final income tax return make certain tax elections and distribute the assets of your estate pursuant to the terms of your Will. Dying without a Will is known as dying intestate. When this happens a court with jurisdiction over your affairs will distribute your assets according to the state s intestate statute without regard to any conversations you may have had with your loved ones. If you decide to name an individual to serve in any fiduciary role keep in mind the person s age and skill set. Many testators choose a corporate executor rather than an individual executor due to the work demanded and the knowledge required. A corporate fiduciary usually has teams of seasoned professionals who have years of experience in administering estates. Unlike an individual executor a corporate executor must be well insured and have adequate capital under federal and state laws. If you decide to name an individual to serve in any fiduciary role keep in mind the person s age and skill set. For example if you name an individual of your own age to serve as the executor of your estate over time they could end up with some type of cognitive impairment. They may also decide the role is too much of a burden in their advanced age or pass away before it is time for them to serve. Trustee Like an executor a trustee may be an individual a corporation or the two may serve as co trustees. Trustees will be expected to fully understand the written terms of your trust document and to faithfully and prudently carry out its terms. They will be expected to maintain principal and income records file state and federal tax returns and prudently invest your trust s assets. They must keep precise records produce information at a beneficiary s request and defend the trust. Many find that the time requirements and complexity of trust administration exceeds an individual s capacity and look to corporate trustees to administer their trusts. Corporate trustees can offer neutrality continuity of administration over the life of the trust and expertise in dealing with unique trust terms and changing state and federal laws that may affect the administration of the trust over time. Some clients prefer to name an individual to serve as co trustee with a corporate trustee so the corporate trustee can shoulder the administrative burdens and investment responsibilities while the individual trustee can provide insight into the backgrounds and needs of the beneficiaries. This arrangement works well for many families. The guardian s duties may include ensuring the family member is cared for and to make medical care education and living accommodation decisions on their behalf. Guardian Many families particularly those with minor children or disabled children appoint a guardian a type of fiduciary who will become legally responsible for such a family member or her or his property upon one s death or incapacity. The guardian s duties may include ensuring the family member is cared for and to make medical care education and living accommodation decisions on their behalf. When naming a guardian consider the age temperament and financial sophistication of the individual and whether the person shares your values. Many people choose to name two separate guardians someone to care for their minor children typically referred to as a guardian of the person and someone else to oversee their finances typically referred to as a guardian of the property. Transcript Close Transcript Alister and Cecile s story Alister Bazaz head of international asset based lending at Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Commercial Bank. PLEASE SEE IMPORTANT INFORMATION AT THE END OF THIS VIDEO. I m Alister Bazaz. I m an executive at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. In 2009 my wife Cecile was diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer s disease at the age of 51. When people hear of Alzheimer s they think it is merely a memory disorder. Ultimately it proves to be more than memory. It s physical. It for example affects the ability to walk the ability to eat the ability to do common things that we take for granted every day. I would say that people need to be more prepared. You need to hope for the best but plan for the worst. You can t work this thing out on the fly because once you are diagnosed the music has stopped. You can t put insurance in place afterwards. You have to have everything designed ready to go should that unexpected eventuality ever happen. Our daughter was a sophomore in college merely 20 years old. Clearly a 20 year old could not make financial decisions on behalf of a mother with Alzheimer s until she was of a certain age. But having come to the conclusion that something could happen to me merely crossing the road or anything that could take me out of the picture meant that Kathleen our daughter had to be in a position to know what was going on in our family. We had to have people appointed to be able to help her maybe even make the decisions for her until she would be able to do it herself. I m so grateful that our financial advisor talked to us about long term disability when we were in our early 40s way before there was the risk of Cecile becoming ill. I feel that if we had not taken long term disability I would have had a tough time. My wife is about to enter a care home because it has come harder for us to look after her at home even though we really want to. In Atlanta where I live the annual cost of care in a facility is approximately $100 000. And there is very limited tax protection for that. So it s a big hit on an annual basis. All the work we did when Cecile was first diagnosed and we had to make quick decisions and put it all in place has allowed me to live the life with her and care for her and attend to her and enjoy her more than worrying about whether the papers were in order or not in order. I know what Cecile s wishes were I know what I have to do I don t have to worry about it. We can enjoy time with her and those moments are priceless. I think it is prudent based on my own experience and my family s experience to be planning for the possibility in your forties before it begets too late. IMPORTANT INFORMATION All guarantees and benefits of the insurance policy are backed by the claims paying ability of the issuing insurance company. They are not backed by Merrill Lynch or its affiliates nor do Merrill Lynch or its affiliates make any representations or guarantees regarding the claims paying ability of the issuing insurance company. Long term care insurance coverage contains benefits exclusions limitations eligibility requirements and specific terms and conditions under which the insurance coverage may be continued in force or discontinued. Not all insurance policies and types of coverage may be available in your state. Neither Bank of America nor any of its affiliates provide tax legal accounting or benefits consulting advice. This video should be regarded as general information on health care considerations and is not intended to provide specific health care advice. If you have questions regarding your particular health care situation please contact your health care legal or tax advisor. The views and opinions expressed are those of the speaker are subject to change without notice at any time and may differ from views expressed by Merrill Lynch or other divisions of Bank of America. These materials are provided for informational purposes only and should not be used or construed as a recommendation of any service security or sector. Any discussions concerning products or services should not be considered a solicitation or recommendation by Merrill Lynch and may not be profitable. It is important that you consider this information in the context of your personal risk tolerance and investment goals. Before acting on the information provided you should consider suitability for your circumstances and if necessary seek professional advice. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Global Wealth Investment Management is a division of Bank of America Corporation BofA Corp. . Merrill Lynch Wealth Management Merrill EdgeTM U.S. Trust Bank of America Merrill Lynch and BofA Global Capital Management are affiliated subdivisions within Global Wealth Investment Management. Merrill Lynch makes available products and services offered by Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated MLPF S and other subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Merrill Edge is available through MLPF S and consists of the Merrill Edge Advisory Center investment guidance and self directed online investing. U.S. Trust operates through Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and other subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Bank of America Merrill Lynch is a marketing name used by several BofA Corp. businesses including but not limited to the Retirement Services business and Institutional Investments Philanthropic Solutions II PS . II PS is part of U.S. Trust. The Private Banking and Investment Group is a division of MLPF S that offers a broad array of personalized wealth management products and services. Both brokerage and investment advisory services including financial planning are offered by the Group s Private Wealth Advisors through MLPF S. The nature and degree of advice and assistance provided the fees charged and client rights and Merrill Lynch s obligations will differ among these services. Investments involve risk including the possible loss of principal investment. Banking products are provided by Bank of America N.A. and affiliated banks Members FDIC and wholly owned subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Bank of America Merrill Lynch is the marketing name for the global banking and global markets businesses of Bank of America Corporation. Lending derivatives and other commercial banking activities are performed globally by banking affiliates of Bank of America Corporation including Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC. Securities strategic advisory and other investment banking activities are performed globally by investment banking affiliates of Bank of America Corporation Investment Banking Affiliates including in the United States Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated and Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. both of which are registered broker dealers and Members of SIPC and in other jurisdictions by locally registered entities. Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated and Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. are registered as futures commission merchants with the CFTC and are members of the NFA. Investment products offered through MLPF S and insurance and annuity products offered through Merrill Lynch Life Agency Inc. Are Not FDIC Insured Are Not Bank Guaranteed May Lose Value Are Not Deposits Are Not Insured by Any Federal Government Agency Are Not a Condition to Any Banking Service or Activity MLPF S is a registered broker dealer registered investment adviser and Member SIPC. Merrill Lynch Life Agency Inc. is a licensed insurance agency. Both are wholly owned subsidiaries of BofA Corp. 2015 Bank of America Corporation. All rights reserved. Types of Trusts A trust can be created during your life or at your death either through a lifetime document a trust agreement or through your Will below are examples of types of trusts you might create during your lifetime or at death . In either case you name a trustee to hold and administer the property you transfer into the trust in accordance with the trust s terms. The trust s terms will identify the people or charities known as beneficiaries who have a right to receive distributions from the trust during the term of the trust as well as at its termination. There are two types of beneficiaries. Current beneficiaries have a present right to receive mandatory or discretionary distributions of income and or principal. Remainder beneficiaries have rights to distributions only after the current beneficiaries rights have ended upon conclusion of the trust s term. Trusts can be revocable or they can be irrevocable. Revocable trusts are generally used as substitutes for traditional Wills. Irrevocable trusts are generally established for tax and asset protection purposes. Of course you should consult with your advisor and attorney to determine which type of trust might be right for you. Creating trusts during your life not only allows you to accomplish specific planning goals but can also provide insight for family members into how you envision your legacy and values being implemented. Establishing trusts particularly during your lifetime creates the opportunity to explore methods of wealth transfer in ways that fit your unique circumstances and align with your goals and values. By starting your trust planning as early as possible you will have time to consider with input from your family and advisors the distribution provisions that can be custom tailored for your family. Provisions can be different for each beneficiary. Distribution provisions can permit a beneficiary to receive distributions on a regular basis or you might give the trustee the absolute discretion to make distributions based upon what is in the best interest of that beneficiary. Sometimes people get creative and try to encourage certain behaviors such as providing for distributions for graduating from school the purchase of a first home getting married or starting a business. During life Revocable living trusts One of the most common estate planning tools is a revocable trust. As its name suggests a revocable trust can be changed or revoked at any time after it s been created so long as you have legal capacity to do so. A revocable trust is often used as a substitute for a Will. It is preferred over a Will in states with high probate costs because assets in a trust do not have to go through the probate process which can be lengthy. This can reduce costs and accelerate distributions to beneficiaries. Your ability to maintain complete and total control over the property in your revocable trust causes the trust assets to be includable in your taxable estate. Accordingly a revocable trust will not reduce your federal estate tax liability. Your revocable trust can utilize estate tax reduction strategies but the revocable trust itself will not produce estate tax savings. Not only can a revocable trust be an alternative to a Will but it can also provide for asset management during those times when you may suffer from a temporary or permanent disability explains Drossman. It facilitates a seamless management of your assets without the need to rely on a durable power of attorney or a court appointed guardian. Your ability to maintain complete and total control over the property in your revocable trust causes the trust assets to be includable in your taxable estate. Only those assets which you re title in the name of your revocable trust will generally avoid probate. All other assets excluding assets that have beneficiary designations like insurance and retirement plans and certain joint property will likely be subject to the probate process. Revocable trusts are often used in conjunction with pour over Wills since it is quite common for people who set up revocable trusts to hold some assets in their individual name. In this way at your death these assets can pour over into your revocable trust and follow the designated terms of the trust. Another benefit of revocable trusts versus Wills is privacy. A Will is generally required to be filed with the court at your death and becomes public information for anyone who cares to search for it. Trusts on the other hand are typically not filed with the court meaning the provisions of the trust can generally remain private to the outside world. During life Irrevocable trusts Irrevocable trusts are established during your life in order to facilitate estate planning and secure asset protection. To secure certain legal and tax benefits like asset protection and certain tax deductions these trusts must be irrevocable meaning that the grantor can ordinarily not change or revoke the trust once it has been created. For added flexibility irrevocable trusts can be drafted to give a third party the right to change certain trust provisions. Typical powers may include giving a third party authority to add or subtract certain classes of beneficiaries move the trust to a different state or withhold distributions for any reason if it is in the best interest of the beneficiaries. After death Testamentary trusts Another common estate planning tool is a testamentary trust a type of irrevocable trust created by a Will that becomes effective only after your death. Because you have passed away and are not capable of changing its terms it is also an irrevocable trust. Though time may pass between the drafting of a testamentary trust and its becoming effective you can help make the transfer of assets run more smoothly by discussing goals with the nominated trustees and clarifying your intentions during your lifetime. This allows trustees to have a better feel for why the trust will be established what it seeks to accomplish how it fits within your overall plan and how it aligns with your values and goals. While a trustee is required to follow the express terms of the trust sometimes written terms can be open to interpretation and it is best to discuss what the terms actually mean to you and what you intend by them. For example if a distribution is to be made to support the beneficiary s lifestyle does it mean the beneficiary s lifestyle on the date you signed the trust the date of your death or some other date Careful and specific drafting can resolve such ambiguities. On the other hand you may want to keep a trust flexible. If so permitting a trustee to make distributions that are in the best interest of the beneficiary as determined at the discretion of the trustee may be one way of doing so. If you are establishing a testamentary trust start with a conversation with the future trustee says Stacy Allred wealth strategist leading the Center for Family Wealth at Merrill. A trustee is often given flexibility to make discretionary distributions of assets for the beneficiary s needs such as health education maintenance and support. Discussing with the nominated trustees your philosophies and guidelines you are using to make lifetime gifting decisions can be helpful. Communication Preparing for the Future For those who ve built careers on being decisive handing over the reins to someone else can be particularly difficult. Even if you name fiduciaries set up a trust and diligently prepare for the transfer of wealth upon your death it s unlikely the transfer will go smoothly if intentions are not clearly communicated prior to the time it actually occurs. Consider a client experiencing cognitive decline who rejected help with financial planning.3 As a result his family was left with a financial quagmire finding checks and misfiled paperwork many months after his passing. Family members can support aged or infirm loved ones by helping them relinquish control in stages rather than asking them to do so in one fell swoop. For those who ve built careers on being decisive handing over the reins to someone else can be particularly difficult. It was a tug of war to get my own parents to realize they couldn t handle their finances anymore says Lori Sieber a senior trust officer at Bank of America Private Bank. It s a trust issue and a control issue. It s probably one of the hardest conversations children will ever have with their parents. Parents may feel like they re losing control or being forced to do something that perhaps they are not equipped to understand anymore. That s why sharing your thoughts and eliciting their feedback as early as possible is crucial so that everyone has time to consider each other s point of view. Family members can support aged or infirm loved ones by helping them relinquish control in stages rather than asking them to do all at once. Most wealth creators want their surviving loved ones to be resilient and empowered to make wealth decisions that align with the family s values. To achieve this goal it s paramount to engage in clear communication a strong system of family governance and ongoing financial education and mentoring. Ultimately these steps help the next generation have the confidence and know how necessary to make decisions in alignment with family values and goals. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Assess Assets The type of asset and how you hold title to that asset matters. Assets held in your name or in the name of your revocable trust will be distributed under the terms of your Will or revocable trust. If these documents are not in place distribution decisions will be made pursuant to state law. However assets held jointly with another person with right of survivorship e.g. assets held in a joint tenancy or a tenancy by the entirety will generally pass directly to that person and not be subject to the terms of your Will or trust. Other assets that generally pass outside of your Will or trust include insurance IRAs and retirement plans pay on death POD bank accounts and transfer on death TOD securities accounts. As a starting point it s a good idea to identify your assets and how each is titled. We recommend to our clients Bank of America Private Bank s Your Personal Inventory Manager which can be a useful tool for organizing financial and estate documents related to the different types of assets one might own. Types of Assets Tangible personal property Some but not all states allow the creation of a list to dispose of tangible personal property such as jewelry clothes art and collectibles that can be incorporated on your death into your Will. By allowing such lists states have given you the ability to rewrite a portion of your estate plan without having to go back to your attorney and incur additional legal fees. By sharing your list with your family members and discussing the reasons behind your decisions you may be able to eliminate many if not all ill feelings among your heirs who might otherwise disagree with each other over who is entitled to a particular object. As an alternative you might leave instructions to the executor to sell everything and then distribute the proceeds to your heirs. Or you may want to design some type of selection process the heirs must follow such as age order. Some families may have multiple beneficiaries decide on distribution of the assets but the process should be clear. Some may opt to bring in a third party to divide personal property if the members of the group cannot come to an agreement on their own. Yet another asset distribution strategy is to simply ask heirs to choose the items they want. Often this self selection process works surprisingly well because heirs make such decisions for different reasons. While economically valuable items might be part of the equation sometimes families don t consider the fact that sentimental items though often less valuable can be just as desirable. You may want to use the planning process as a chance to gift some things you are ready to part with says Allred. That way you can participate in the enjoyment of giving during life versus after your passing. ORGANIZING PAPERWORK ISSUE ORGANIZING CRUCIAL PAPERWORK LEADS TO A SENSE OF INFORMATION OVERLOAD. Solution Bank of America Private Bank s Your Personal Inventory link to can get you started by serving as a master document on which you can store personal information ranging from passwords and PINs to medical records financial documents and key contacts Inevitably challenges will arise during the planning process. Here s one way to troubleshoot a common issue and ensure the process runs smoothly. Residential property Distributing residential property requires an understanding of both economic and sentimental value. Consider a father who left a beach house to his four adult children in the hope it would become a legacy property. Three of the kids were able to pay their portion of the maintenance fees but one wasn t. This led to a sense of insecurity on the part of the less affluent sibling who felt he was unable to contribute his fair share and feared resentment from his siblings. Distributing residential property requires an understanding of both economic and sentimental value. In these cases one should keep an eye on how the plan may impact the surviving family s economic situation and relationship dynamics says Kevin Hindman national trust executive at Merrill. If one wishes to keep residential property in the family one may need to provide funds for upkeep taxes etc. Intangible property Perhaps the majority of your assets by value will fall in the category of intangible assets. Your bank investment management and retirement accounts are examples of intangible assets. So is a family business ownership of which may be represented by shares of stock or partnership units. Generally these assets are less personal in nature and therefore choosing who receives what will not be as challenging as personal or residential property. But that is usually not the case when it comes to a family business we discuss business property and succession below . Still you need to give thought as to how these assets pass to your beneficiaries. Your retirement account may pass to those specified in a beneficiary designation. Your brokerage account may pass directly to a spouse or another if titled as joint with right of survivorship or as a transfer on death account. Or if you titled the account in the name of your revocable trust it will be disposed of in accordance with the trust s terms. If you have not transferred an intangible asset into your revocable trust or if it does not pass by right of survivorship or beneficiary designation then it will be disposed of under the terms of your last Will. ORGANIZING AND PROTECTING DIGITAL ASSETS4 Many families keep important information such as passwords and account numbers saved on their computers or on a portable USB stick but others still keep everything locked away in file cabinets. Regardless of where it s stored it s important to know in advance where critical information is located. Collecting asset information now can make things easier when you your family or your fiduciary needs it the most in the event you become incapacitated for example. Bank of America Private Bank s Your Personal Inventory Manager can be a useful tool for itemizing important documents and key digital assets such as Personal assets photos videos emails music Social digital assets accounts on all social media platforms Financial digital assets on line banking sites bill paying sites investment manager sites credit card sites etc. Business digital assets domain names and web access patent or customer information intellectual property You can help protect these assets by creating an inventory where you list storage locations usernames and passwords. This can be kept with the latest version of your Will trusts and other estate planning documents. You may not only want to consider giving your agent trustee or executor the authority to access your digital assets e.g. through use of a password and or username but you may also want to give those persons authority to have access to and legal control over your digital assets and their content so they can control their disposition effectively upon your death or incapacity. Business Property and Succession Complex scenarios can play out in business succession. One of the important decisions a business owner must face is when and how to step out of the business in other words business management and succession planning. Take a father who owned a third generation business. Two of his three children had no experience or interest in the business while the third had a senior management role making her the natural person to whom the business should devolve. Had all three children been left the business consider the consequences If the sibling in a leadership role was receiving a paycheck and the other two siblings held equity this could lead to conflict if the latter two siblings weren t happy with how the former was running the business. In the worst case scenario explains Hindman the two siblings with equity could outvote their CEO sibling. One of the important decisions a business owner must face is when and how to step out of the business in other words business management and succession planning. A better solution might be to leave the business to the experienced sibling and make the other two beneficiaries a bequest of assets of comparable value i.e. equalizing their shares in the estate . Everybody feels like the inheritance has been equalized but they ve also made sure the right assets end up with the right beneficiary says Hindman. Keep certain things in mind when transferring or selling your business to family members such as tax consequences depending on how you choose to gift bequest or sell your business Lifetime Gift Sale to Your Family. If your family is involved in the business you could give or sell your business to them. Sale to Non Family During Your Lifetime. If your family is not involved in the business you could sell the business to someone who is not a family member when you are ready to move on. Gift Sale Upon Death. If you are not ready to retire you could simply provide for the sale or distribution of your business upon your death. Sale to Co owners. If you co own the business with others you could enter into an agreement with them to sell or require them to buy your business interest upon the occurrence of one or more events. Create an Employee Stock Ownership Plan. You can sell some or all of the business to your employees. Finally if you actively manage the business you should make sure to have a plan in place for one or more persons to take over the management of the business if you are no longer able to carry out those responsibilities. For more information on succession planning see Fine Tuning Your Business at ustrust.com finetuningyourbusiness. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Passing on your Legacy Sharing Values In addition to distributing property of economic value families need to consider how they ll pass along a priceless asset their values and legacy. There are a few ways to help achieve this goal. One is to create a legacy letter describing your values life lessons and hopes and dreams for the future. This may include elements of your life story including your biggest accomplishments and or deepest regrets. Such a letter is not meant to be binding on your heirs or fiduciaries but rather is meant to tell your story why you hold the values you do why you set the goals you have set and why you hope your family will not only respect those values and goals but pass them along as well. If you actively manage the business you should make sure to have a plan in place for one or more persons to take over the management of the business if you are no longer able to carry out those responsibilities. Talking about your legacy can be both illuminating and instructive. Sometimes the mere act of memorializing the story of how your wealth was created can help the next generation find the purpose and value in their inheritance. Technology continues to make it easier for families to document and define their legacy. Capturing stories on video and legacy applications like Immortalia7 offer new ways to chronicle a narrative using digital devices. Whether they see read or hear it providing future generations the opportunity to understand your story is extremely powerful. COGNATIVE DECLINE As people live longer an increasing number of Americans will grapple with various forms of cognitive decline including dementia and Alzheimer s disease. These are commonly characterized by memory loss decreased or poor judgment and difficulty with familiar tasks.5 In 2018 Alzheimer s and other dementias will cost Americans a total of $277 billion including $186 billion in Medicare and Medicaid payments. And though risk increases as one grows older age is not the only factor in the onset of Alzheimer s. Bank of America Merrill Lynch executive Alister Bazaz whose wife Cecile was diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer s disease at the age of 51 learned the hard way. As Alister and Cecile were relatively young they did not have long term care insurance which could have paid for an at home caregiver for Cecile during the first stages of the disease and then for her residence care. But Bazaz had wisely purchased higher amounts of long term disability insurance above and beyond the basic level provided by Cecile s employer several years earlier. Long term disability insurance has substantially compensated for Cecile s loss of income and the very high costs of 24 7 care. To prepare you need to assess your own personal situation says Bazaz. Are you both working do you both have long term disability coverage and is the coverage adequate to take care of you in the event of a long illness Without the policy my payments would be coming significantly out of pocket. Had Alister not been proactive before his wife s diagnosis they might have found themselves financially burdened. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today The Challenges of Caretaking Before Illness Anticipating Caretaking Needs Another aspect of planning for the future many people tend to overlook is long term care. While few people anticipate needing long term care the reality is 70 of those who turned 65 in 2015 will need some form of long term care during their lifetime.8 As life expectancy increases so do the chances of health complications both expected and unexpected that will call for professional care. And as costs continue to rise funding long term care is of mounting concern. In fact only 52 of wealthy individuals consider themselves prepared for the financial impact of long term care for themselves or their spouse and only 44 feel prepared for the financial impact of longterm care for a parent. All too often health care planning begins and ends with naming a health care proxy and creating a living Will. Yet all too often health care planning begins and ends with naming a health care proxy and creating a living Will. The fact is these documents are just the starting point for making caretaking decisions. That s why it helps to consider and plan for how you would fund a long term illness and to define and communicate your expectations of care at every level while you and your loved ones are still healthy. During Illness Managing Incapacity and Family Dynamics Planning now for old age and possible incapacity also gives families time to think about different levels of care that might be appropriate in different scenarios. Knowing how to choose caregivers and identifying when it s necessary to move into a facility or being aware of desired care needs after surgery or treatment allows you to plan and prepare for a range of situations as well as to make your wishes and caretaking preferences known to family members. Dealing with a long term illness or disability is never easy but having transparent discussions with family members about the common challenges of caretaking can help alleviate some of the stress these situations will inevitably bring. For instance although 87 of people receive at least some of their care from outside parties 10 many family members feel a sense of guilt about paying someone else to care for a loved one. And for family members who become caretakers themselves the experience can be emotionally and financially draining.11 Many familial caretakers are also part of the sandwich generation those boomers and Gen X ers who simultaneously balance their children s college tuition with caring for their parents. Long term Care Insuarance Long term care insurance can provide a financial safety net should you or a loved one face a long term illness or disability. The trade off between obtaining coverage earlier in life at a lower premium or waiting until your 50s or 60s and paying higher premiums is a tricky one. But if you wait too long there s an increased chance you won t be able to obtain coverage at all. Generally in order for long term care insurance to take effect it must be purchased before any diagnosis of impairment. Though people usually start talking about it in their 50s there s no one right age to obtain long term care insurance says Cynthia Hutchins director of Financial Gerontology at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Hutchins suggests starting the process by asking key questions about your family health history your current risk factors and your potential for longevity. Considering the expense of long term care can also help families foresee potential issues. After factoring in health concerns work with your private client advisor to determine how far you can spend down your assets. Using Bank of America Private Bank s proprietary modeling tools your private client advisor along with a wealth strategist can run cash flow projections based on a number of different factors and assumptions including your aversion to risk and the skyrocketing cost of long term care. When you look at your wealth projections with your private client advisor remember not all risks are created equal explains Hutchins. For example when it comes to inflation s impact on the ability to achieve financial goals related to long term care one should consider factoring in an above average inflation rate because costs continue to rise at a surprising clip. Considering the expense of long term care can also help families foresee potential issues. Considering the expense of long term care can also help families foresee potential issues. But keep in mind there are other concerns such as the importance of communicating your wishes as to who will be providing care family member or outsourced what type of caregiving outsourced in home family member you d like to receive where you d like to be taken care of home or facility and how the cost is going to be covered. This in turn will go a long way in alleviating the emotional burden on your loved ones who would otherwise be making these decisions after you become ill. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Crisis Management and Sudden Death Not long ago a client s family experienced a terrible tragedy. The family matriarch was killed in an accident leaving her loved ones consumed with grief. Fortunately the family had established a system of family governance and she had developed a detailed estate plan. The governance process kicked in and the family members knew what their respective roles were who was to pay the bills who was to manage the household etc. This gave each of them a sense of purpose during their time of grief. Each year approximately 530 000 people experience sudden cardiac arrest with only about a 10 survival rate 12 and accidents and other injuries take thousands of lives every year.13 These incidents can leave family members scrambling for answers and suddenly facing a new set of responsibilities especially when the deceased or incapacitated person was the family s primary breadwinner or financial manager. Consider another client who lost her husband the family s primary financial manager to a sudden heart attack. She and her husband had already established a plan and she was able to enlist the services of the family s estate planning attorney accountant and private client advisor to assist in accessing accounts and gathering key documents to help her through this period while she was focused on taking care of the rest of her family even as she fought through her own grief. Planning Early 8 Planning Elements Starting the Conversation Creating A Plan Assess Assets Your Legacy Caretaking Sudden Death Prepare Today Preparing for Tommorow Means Enhancing Life Today While people will face similar questions about their assets and legacy planning for the future is a deeply personal process. Your private client advisor can serve as an educator helping you weigh various options and offering a range of potential solutions. Of course thinking about one s mortality is never easy but doing so now will help you enjoy your life today providing peace of mind and the assurance that all that has been is and will be your life will continue in the legacy you leave behind. While people will face similar questions about their assets and legacy planning for the future is a deeply personal process. Ultimately defining your wishes isn t just about what s at stake for your family after your passing. Often it s about helping you and your loved ones gain clarity and direction for the future and in doing so enable you to better enjoy your life. Ultimately defining your wishes isn t just about what s at stake for your family after your passing. Often it s about helping you and your loved ones gain clarity and direction for the future and in doing so enable you to better enjoy your life. Your private client advisor can help you and your family prepare for whatever the future may hold. Meet with your advisor today to help you prepare for tomorrow. ACTION CHECKLISTS Three useful guides to help families prepare for the passing of a loved one Develop a Health and Wellness Plan for the Later Years Make Organizing Your Estate a Priority Loss Legacy and Looking Ahead LEARN MORE ABOUT FAMILY WEALTH SERVICES EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 