 We understand that you value superior service insight and convenience. With two convenient tools to choose from it is easier than ever to find the information you re looking for. At privatebank.bankofamerica.com you have the ability to see your Bank of America Private Bank banking and brokerage relationships within a convenient integrated single screen view. Plus stay connected anytime anywhere with our mobile apps for iPad iPhone and Android . Highlights of Bank of America Private Bank Account Access Online Account Access View comprehensive account information including summary holdings and activity detail Connect directly with your Advisor through Secure Inbox Transfer cash between your eligible Private Bank accounts and or linked Bank of America accounts or request a check disbursement from an eligible Private Bank account Create run and save customized reports on your Investment Trust and Custody Accounts View historical account statements and tax documents with the ability to go green and suppress paper statements Keep tabs on current U.S. and global markets including intraday pricing updates on your holdings Explore our proprietary market insights and timely perspectives Transcript Close Transcript On screen copy Bank of America Private Bank A newly integrated banking experience A newly integrated investing experience A newly integrated digital experience On screen copy Available for iPhone and Android Industry Leading Security Features Customizable Dashboard Manage Monitor Watchlists Scan Documents Send Secure Messages See Your Real Time Balances Request Check Disbursement Easily Move Between Accounts Bank of America Private Bank Bank of America Merrill On screen copy What would you like the power to do Bank of America Private Bank Disclosure IMPORTANT INFORMATION Bank of America Private Bank is a division of Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation BofA Corp. .Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated also referred to as MLPF S or Merrill makes available certain investment products sponsored managed distributed or provided by companies that are affiliates of BofA Corp. MLPF S is a registered broker dealer Member SIPC and a wholly owned subsidiary of BofA Corp. Banking products are provided by Bank of America N.A. and affiliated banks Members FDIC and wholly owned subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Investment products Are Not FDIC Insured May Lose Value Are Not Bank Guaranteed 2019 Bank of America Corporation. Mobile Account Access Review balances holdings and transactions View summaries of linked Bank of America and Merrill accounts with the ability to seamlessly navigate to the Bank of America App without having to log in again Communicate securely with your Advisor or quickly scan and send a document through Secure Inbox Transfer cash between your eligible Private Bank accounts and or linked Bank of America accounts or request a check disbursement from an eligible Private Bank account View historical data and asset charts Access market news insights Our Latest Thinking and listen to episodes from our propriety Perspectives Podcast Create manage and monitor your Watchlists We view our clients online security as paramount. As such the apps incorporate market leading mobile security with fraud detection and a range of customizable authentication options. Access to the apps can be gained through Touch ID or Face ID on iOS and Android fingerprint on select Android devices. The Bank of America Private Bank mobile apps are available to clients who have registered for Bank of America Private Bank Online Account Access. iPad iPhone Android Questions Answers What is the cost to use these apps There is no charge to download and use any Bank of America Private Bank mobile applications. Depending on your mobile device you may be charged access fees by your wireless service provider. Please check with your provider for details on possible fees. What do I need to use these apps Details about the operating systems for each device are listed below. Your device must be able to access the Internet and you must have an investment trust or custody account with Bank of America Private Bank and be enrolled for online web access. Device Operating System iPad iOS 11.0 or later iPhone iOS 11.0 or later Android OS 5.0 or later How secure are these apps We are committed to protecting your privacy and use the same advanced encryption technology on your device as we use on our website. For details about our Privacy Policy visit our client information protection site here. ENROLL FOR ONLINE ACCOUNT ACCESS LEARN MORE ABOUT Bank of America Private Bank 