 November 12 2019 Oil market outlook still revolving around excess supply The oil market has absorbed supply shocks much better than feared this year. In fact despite sharply lower supply from Iran exports down from about 2 million barrels per day mbd a year ago to about 0.4 mbd in September and Venezuela production down from 1.4 mbd on average in 2018 to 0.65 mbd in September as well as a major attack on Saudi Arabia s oil infrastructure in September Brent oil prices have declined from $71 per barrel in 2018 to $66 in the first half and a $62 average in the second half in line with our expectations. Click Here to Learn More November 4 2019 Earnings Stall Likely Over The hallmark of this record long economic expansion has been recurrent fears of a relapse into the debt deflation abyss of the 2008 financial crisis. This has played out in three stages of panic driven downturns the first precipitated by the European Central Bank s ECB s premature tightening in 2011 the second driven by a China Emerging Market EM recession and commodity oil price collapse and the most recent by the Federal Reserve s Fed s miscalculation of the impact of quantitative tightening and rate normalization. Click Here to Learn More October 28 2019 Main Street cheers despite Wall Street fears While fears of recession seem to have peaked in August there are big differences in the confidence of different economic players about the future. Confidence remains very high in the consumer and small business sectors but has plunged to recessionary levels in some surveys of big company CEOs such as The Conference Board s survey. It seems Main Street has not been affected by the negative news flow that has dampened the outlook on Wall Street and in corporate boardrooms. Click Here to Learn More October 21 2019 Market Styles Sectors Market Caps and Factors...Oh My Far from homogenous the U.S. equity market can be analyzed and invested through many different lenses. Here we examine trends across style sectors market cap and factors. Click Here to Learn More 