 Bank of America Private Bank is committed to making your philanthropic endeavors more effective efficient and personally fulfilling. Drawing on our deep resources and experience in philanthropy we can work with you to design implement and evaluate your philanthropic plan. Whether you are an individual a family a foundation or a corporation Bank of America Private Bank s National Consulting and Advisory Practice can help make your philanthropic vision a reality. At Bank of America Private Bank your philanthropic aspirations are central to the design and delivery of our consulting and advisory services. Our philanthropic consultants are knowledgeable in the many aspects of the donor experience. We can work with you from your earliest inspiration through to the realization of your philanthropic goals. We recognize that becoming an effective donor is a continuous and iterative process and are equipped to help you manage the dynamic shifts that may arise in both your philanthropic goals and in the communities in which you seek to achieve them. Inspiration Passion Purpose Philanthropy is most effective and sustainable when it is connected to what matters most to you. We can help you to identify and affirm your values and interest areas and to articulate them in the form of a mission statement to guide your giving. Engagement Education Among the tenets of successful philanthropy is the willingness to continuously learn from your experiences. With our broad array of resources we can help you develop a learning plan designed to enhance your knowledge of the issues you choose to address. Participation When donors are engaged with their giving they are likely to be more effective and more personally fulfilled. For some this means volunteering or partnering with grant recipients in addition to providing financial support. For others broadening their philanthropy to include family members may provide the meaningful participation they seek. We will help you to determine your ideal level and type of engagement while helping you to inspire the participation of others as desired. Implementation Grantmaking Selecting which organizations to support in furtherance of your philanthropic mission can be challenging. We can help you to develop and establish the criteria to guide your funding decisions and to structure your grantmaking to maximize your ability to achieve a positive impact. If desired our grantmaking specialists can assist you by participating in site visits to potential grant recipients devising grant terms incorporating alternative giving mechanisms beyond traditional grantmaking and helping to expand your network to include others seeking similar charitable goals.1 Realization Evaluation Impact The ability to measure success or progress is a critical component of effective philanthropy. We will help you to establish criteria with which to assess whether you are achieving your giving goals and to adjust your giving strategy accordingly so that your giving can be both successful and satisfying. How Bank of America Private Bank can help you For more information on how we may help you achieve your philanthropic mission and goals please contact your advisor. Learn More About Strategic Philanthrophy Grantmaking EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 1Depending on the complexity of the engagement an additional fee may apply. Investing involves risk including the possible loss of principal investment. Institutional Investments Philanthropic Solutions II PS is part of Bank of America Private Bank a division of Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation BofA Corp. . Trust and fiduciary services and other banking products are provided by wholly owned banking affiliates of BofA Corp. including Bank of America N.A. 