 Overview With unique attributes that distinguish them from other asset classes nonfinancial assets may offer you valuable financial benefits while often providing personal benefits as well. Our Specialty Asset Management group has extensive experience managing timber farm and ranch land oil gas and mineral interests 1 real estate and private businesses and can work with your your Bank of America Private Bank team to integrate them into your overall plan and portfolio. Transcript Close Transcript On screen copy Investing in Real Assets Disclosure Please read important information at the end of this program. How do you take advantage of the land of opportunity that lies beyond the financial markets Investing in real assets might well be the answer. Ourspecialty asset management team has deep experience managing real assets like timberland On screen copy Timberland farm and ranch land On screen copy Farm and Ranch Land oil and gas On screen copy Oil Gas and real estate. On screen copy Real Estate Because these assets don t follow the financial market they can help to diversify and reduce a portfolio s overall volatility. On screen copy Help to diversify and Reduce Volatility With offices across the country we have a distinguished history of using a boots on the ground management approach for clients who are interested in adding real assets to their portfolio or who own them today. This includes the identification of investment properties On screen copy Identification Comprehensive evaluation On screen copy Evaluation Price negotiation On screen copy Price Negotiation Acquisition On screen copy Acquisition and ongoing management. On screen copy Management Our specialized industry knowledge in forestry agriculture petroleum engineering and real estate helps us to effectively manage real assets which can be an important piece of your overall strategy to grow and preserve wealth for you your family and future generations. So when you re ready to think beyond the financial markets think real assets. On screen copy BankofAmerica.com PrivateBank Disclosure Certain Bank of America Private Bank associates are registered representatives with Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated MLPF S and may assist you with investment products and services provided through MLPF S and other nonbank investment affiliates. MLPF S is a registered broker dealer Member SIPC and a wholly owned subsidiary of Bank of America Corporation BofA Corp. . Private Bank operates through Bank of America N.A. and other subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated also referred to as MLPF S or Merrill makes available certain investment products sponsored managed distributed or provided by companies that are affiliates of Bank of America BofA Corp . MLPF S is a registered broker dealer Member SIPC and a wholly owned subsidiary of BofA Corp. Merrill Private Wealth Management is a division of MLPF S that offers a broad array of personalized wealth management products and services. Both brokerage and investment advisory services including financial planning are offered by the Private Wealth Advisors through MLPF S. The nature and degree of advice and assistance provided the fees charged and client rights and Merrill s obligations will differ among these services. The banking credit and trust services sold by the Private Wealth Advisors are offered by licensed banks and trust companies including Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and other affiliated banks. Investing involves risk including the possible loss of principal. Diversification does not ensure a profit or protect against loss in declining markets. There are special risks associated with an investment in commodities real estate or certain industry sectors including market price fluctuations regulatory changes interest rate changes credit risk economic changes climate change the impact of adverse political or financial factors or lack of diversification. Nonfinancial assets such as closely held businesses real estate oil gas and mineral properties and timber farm and ranch land are complex in nature and involve risks including total loss of value. Special risk considerations include natural events for example earthquakes or fires complex tax considerations and lack of liquidity. Nonfinancial assets are not suitable for all investors. Always consult with your independent attorney tax advisor investment manager and insurance agent for final recommendations and before changing or implementing any financial tax or estate planning strategy. Investment products Are Not FDIC Insured Are Not Bank Guaranteed May Lose Value We can help you realize your objectives with assets you already own or help you acquire specific assets to take advantage of their capital growth and diversification potential whether you own these assets outright or they are held in trust. Our team of specialists can provide complete turnkey services including identifying and purchasing real property and providing ongoing management. Farm and Ranch At Bank of America Private Bank our professionals directly coordinate the management of over 1.5 million acres 2 of farm and ranch land. We can help enhance the value of farms and ranches held outright or in a trust. OUR FARM AND RANCH PROFESSIONALS PROVIDE Professional land management Oversight of leases and current land use Annual reviews of asset performance and market conditions Acquisition and disposition services Soil water and wildlife conservation programs Explore Farm Ranch Solutions Real Estate With specialized investment and property management services spanning many aspects of real estate ownership we work to help meet your objectives for office retail industrial multifamily and single family properties as well as development acreage you may hold directly or in trust. OUR REAL ESTATE SPECIALISTS HELP ENHANCE POTENTIAL RETURNS BY PROVIDING Strategic guidance and due diligence for acquisitions Comprehensive asset management and administration Highest and best use analysis Acquisition and disposition services Property marketing and sales services Timberland Bank of America Private Bank provides professional forestry and land management as well as advisory services for timberland investments held in trust or via direct ownership. Customized to help meet your goals these services range from intensive investment return management to recreational preservation and amenity management. OUR TIMBERLAND PROFESSIONALS PROVIDE Timber inventory and asset analysis Acquisition and disposition services Land enhancement Advanced silvicultural techniques Conservation and environmental management Identification of alternative sources of income Explore Timberland Solutions Oil Gas We provide a broad range of management and consulting services across all types of oil gas and mineral interests 1 held in trusts. The team focuses on enhancing revenues reducing expenses and improving the property. WE HELP OPTIMIZE THE VALUE OF THESE ASSETS BY PROVIDING Customized property management services Lease negotiations and monitoring Farm out unitization agreement and other contract negotiation Evaluation of and participation in workovers and wildcat and development wells Environmental inspections Petroleum engineering experience Comprehensive oil and gas accounting Explore Oil Gas Solutions Private Business Bank of America Private Bank provides support to owners and heirs in the management of closely held business interests nonmarketable equity securities including C and S corporations LLCs and FLPs. OUR PRIVATE BUSINESS PROFESSIONALS PROVIDE Strategic planning and oversight Risk monitoring Estate plan implementation Corporate governance oversight Business succession planning LEARN MORE ABOUT SPECIALTY ASSET MANAGEMENT EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 