 Watch a personal story of a family dealing with Alzheimer s about identifying concerns preferences and goals. Transcript Close Transcript Alister and Cecile s story Alister Bazaz head of international asset based lending at Bank of America Merrill Lynch Global Commercial Bank. PLEASE SEE IMPORTANT INFORMATION AT THE END OF THIS VIDEO. I m Alister Bazaz. I m an executive at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. In 2009 my wife Cecile was diagnosed with early onset Alzheimer s disease at the age of 51. When people hear of Alzheimer s they think it is merely a memory disorder. Ultimately it proves to be more than memory. It s physical. It for example affects the ability to walk the ability to eat the ability to do common things that we take for granted every day. I would say that people need to be more prepared. You need to hope for the best but plan for the worst. You can t work this thing out on the fly because once you are diagnosed the music has stopped. You can t put insurance in place afterwards. You have to have everything designed ready to go should that unexpected eventuality ever happen. Our daughter was a sophomore in college merely 20 years old. Clearly a 20 year old could not make financial decisions on behalf of a mother with Alzheimer s until she was of a certain age. But having come to the conclusion that something could happen to me merely crossing the road or anything that could take me out of the picture meant that Kathleen our daughter had to be in a position to know what was going on in our family. We had to have people appointed to be able to help her maybe even make the decisions for her until she would be able to do it herself. I m so grateful that our financial advisor talked to us about long term disability when we were in our early 40s way before there was the risk of Cecile becoming ill. I feel that if we had not taken long term disability I would have had a tough time. My wife is about to enter a care home because it has come harder for us to look after her at home even though we really want to. In Atlanta where I live the annual cost of care in a facility is approximately $100 000. And there is very limited tax protection for that. So it s a big hit on an annual basis. All the work we did when Cecile was first diagnosed and we had to make quick decisions and put it all in place has allowed me to live the life with her and care for her and attend to her and enjoy her more than worrying about whether the papers were in order or not in order. I know what Cecile s wishes were I know what I have to do I don t have to worry about it. We can enjoy time with her and those moments are priceless. I think it is prudent based on my own experience and my family s experience to be planning for the possibility in your forties before it begets too late. IMPORTANT INFORMATION All guarantees and benefits of the insurance policy are backed by the claims paying ability of the issuing insurance company. They are not backed by Merrill Lynch or its affiliates nor do Merrill Lynch or its affiliates make any representations or guarantees regarding the claims paying ability of the issuing insurance company. Long term care insurance coverage contains benefits exclusions limitations eligibility requirements and specific terms and conditions under which the insurance coverage may be continued in force or discontinued. Not all insurance policies and types of coverage may be available in your state. Neither Bank of America nor any of its affiliates provide tax legal accounting or benefits consulting advice. This video should be regarded as general information on health care considerations and is not intended to provide specific health care advice. If you have questions regarding your particular health care situation please contact your health care legal or tax advisor. The views and opinions expressed are those of the speaker are subject to change without notice at any time and may differ from views expressed by Merrill Lynch or other divisions of Bank of America. These materials are provided for informational purposes only and should not be used or construed as a recommendation of any service security or sector. Any discussions concerning products or services should not be considered a solicitation or recommendation by Merrill Lynch and may not be profitable. It is important that you consider this information in the context of your personal risk tolerance and investment goals. Before acting on the information provided you should consider suitability for your circumstances and if necessary seek professional advice. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Global Wealth Investment Management is a division of Bank of America Corporation BofA Corp. . Merrill Lynch Wealth Management Merrill EdgeTM U.S. Trust Bank of America Merrill Lynch and BofA Global Capital Management are affiliated subdivisions within Global Wealth Investment Management. Merrill Lynch makes available products and services offered by Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated MLPF S and other subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Merrill Edge is available through MLPF S and consists of the Merrill Edge Advisory Center investment guidance and self directed online investing. U.S. Trust operates through Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC and other subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Bank of America Merrill Lynch is a marketing name used by several BofA Corp. businesses including but not limited to the Retirement Services business and Institutional Investments Philanthropic Solutions II PS . II PS is part of U.S. Trust. The Private Banking and Investment Group is a division of MLPF S that offers a broad array of personalized wealth management products and services. Both brokerage and investment advisory services including financial planning are offered by the Group s Private Wealth Advisors through MLPF S. The nature and degree of advice and assistance provided the fees charged and client rights and Merrill Lynch s obligations will differ among these services. Investments involve risk including the possible loss of principal investment. Banking products are provided by Bank of America N.A. and affiliated banks Members FDIC and wholly owned subsidiaries of BofA Corp. Bank of America Merrill Lynch is the marketing name for the global banking and global markets businesses of Bank of America Corporation. Lending derivatives and other commercial banking activities are performed globally by banking affiliates of Bank of America Corporation including Bank of America N.A. Member FDIC. Securities strategic advisory and other investment banking activities are performed globally by investment banking affiliates of Bank of America Corporation Investment Banking Affiliates including in the United States Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated and Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. both of which are registered broker dealers and Members of SIPC and in other jurisdictions by locally registered entities. Merrill Lynch Pierce Fenner Smith Incorporated and Merrill Lynch Professional Clearing Corp. are registered as futures commission merchants with the CFTC and are members of the NFA. Investment products offered through MLPF S and insurance and annuity products offered through Merrill Lynch Life Agency Inc. Are Not FDIC Insured Are Not Bank Guaranteed May Lose Value Are Not Deposits Are Not Insured by Any Federal Government Agency Are Not a Condition to Any Banking Service or Activity MLPF S is a registered broker dealer registered investment adviser and Member SIPC. Merrill Lynch Life Agency Inc. is a licensed insurance agency. Both are wholly owned subsidiaries of BofA Corp. 2015 Bank of America Corporation. All rights reserved. When people hear of Alzheimer s they think it is merely a memory disorder. Ultimately it proves to be more than memory. LEARN MORE ABOUT FAMILY WEALTH SERVICES EXPLORE MORE INSIGHTS 