 Corporate executives face unique challenges when it comes to managing wealth. While cash can contribute significantly to personal wealth oftentimes it is only part of the total compensation story. For many senior executives compensation also includes a significant equity component often the largest component of their total compensation. Furthermore their compensation frequently is subject to a combination of company and government imposed rules and regulations which if not followed could lead to penalties fines and other actions. Careful planning and execution of strategies designed to address these rules and regulations help to mitigate risks that executives face. While the components of a corporate executive s compensation make their financial situation more complex it also presents them with tremendous opportunities to provide for their children and loved ones fund a comfortable retirement and leave a meaningful legacy to their heirs and the causes they care about. Close all Open all Unravelling the complexities of corporate compensation For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request thePersonal CFO Guide.. Navigating rules and restrictions for company stock For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request the Personal CFO Guide. Considerations when negotiating employment agreements For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request the Personal CFO Guide. Protecting and monetizing company stock holdings For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request the Personal CFO Guide. Your company stock and company change in control For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request the Personal CFO Guide. Planning for your retirement For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request the Personal CFO Guide. Techniques to transfer wealth For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request the Personal CFO Guide. Realizing philanthropic goals For answers to these questions and more please contact your Bank of America Private Bank advisor or contact your local Bank of America Private Bank office and request the Personal CFO Guide. 