 Second quarter earnings season is now in full swing raising the question of what investors can expect from the rest of 2019 and into 2020. At first glance two contradictions make for a puzzling read. First although corporate profit growth is expected to be tepid this year the S P 500 Index is up more than 20% year to date closing above 3000 for the first time in mid July. Second investors are skittish about the prospect of slower economic growth yet for the most part markets have seen pretty low volatility. In the face of such incongruities it s important to stay focused but only on the big picture. Equity markets may still have room to run but investors shouldn t be surprised by a summer sell off. This is all consistent with long term bull markets which rarely follow a linear pattern. Instead they follow a predictable though admittedly frustrating rhythm of rally retest recovery and repeat. Here are four key points to factor into investment decisions heading into the later part of this year. Equity Markets Are an Earnings Indicator Markets aren t always rational but history has shown that equity markets do a decent job of predicting earnings as we ve seen over the past year. The stock market sell off in at the end of 2018 predicted the earnings recession and economic slowdown this year though in hindsight it now seems exaggerated. By the same token I believe the equity market rally in 2019 may be predicting an earnings recovery and economic improvement later in 2019 and into 2020. Keep in mind that earnings recessions and recoveries are all relative. High double digit earnings growth in 2018 thanks in part to the federal tax cut passed at the end of 2017 made for tough comparables going into 2019. As those comparisons roll off however it sets a more realistic bar for 2020. My colleagues in the firm s Global Investment Committee have nuanced views on how an earnings recession could spiral into an economic recession in 2020 but an earnings recession does not always mean an economic recession as you can see in the chart below. That distinction is critical when thinking about the longer term prospects of this market cycle. Display 1 Market corrections have historically preceded earnings recessions even without being associated with economic recessions Source St. Louis Fed U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis Bloomberg Past performance is no guide to future performance and the value of investments and income from them can fall as well as rise. Indices are unmanaged and not available for direct investment. They are shown for illustrative purposes only and do not represent the performance of any specific investment. This Market Still Has Room to Run Continued strength in earnings against the backdrop of easier comparables is just one of the reasons to question the doom and gloom narrative that has kept some investors on the sidelines. As I ve pointed out before bear markets are typically born out of excessive optimism coupled with deteriorating economics. Yet investors are still sitting on the sidelines after cashing out of equity funds and ETFs late last year. Other key factors also bode well for equities markets. The financial conditions index suggests that the U.S. economy is still very healthy and with the U.S. presidential election around the corner the Trump administration will likely do everything it can to nudge the economy. Although the U.S. Treasury bond yield between three month and 10 year rates inverted earlier this year it s now back in positive territory. The initial inversion of the yield curve tends to precede market peaks by a full two years historically U.S. stocks have gained 40% on average during that period. In another vote of confidence companies continue to raise dividends even in the face of lower rates. Notably nearly half of the companies in the S P 500 recently had a higher dividend yield than the 10 year Treasury. A Short Term Pullback Is Likely At the same time many investors have stayed on the sidelines of this year s rally. Evidence also shows that investors who are in the market may have grown a bit complacent. So far in 2019 the market has only experienced a decline of 1% or more in seven instances vs. 32 times in 2018. Translation The market may be overdue for some volatility. Admittedly trying to time short term pullbacks within the context of a secular bull market is tricky. Still given the lack of volatility and past patterns of pullbacks now probably isn t the time to be turning up the volume on portfolio risk. Investors worried about a summer selloff may want to trim their direct market exposure but they shouldn t lose site of the long game. As we ve seen throughout this cycle selloffs have set the scene for further gains. Keep in mind too that despite new highs for the S P 500 the market was effectively flat for 350 days between January 2018 and June 2019. Since 1900 there have been just seven times when the market was effectively flat for 350 days. In all such instances the market was up six months later. Source FactSet Sentiment Trader June 19 2019. The market as measured by S P 500 back to inception and then previously the Dow Jones. Past performance is no guide to future performance and the value of investments and income from them can fall as well as rise. Indices are unmanaged and not available for direct investment. They are shown for illustrative purposes only and do not represent the performance of any specific investment. Forecasts estimates are based on current market conditions subject to change and may not necessarily come to pass. Safety Stocks Have Been Overbought As investors have gotten skittish this year many have turned to consumer staples and other seemingly safe stocks. However if there is any bubble in the market right now it s in companies perceived as being recession proof. The quality growth spread the valuation of the highest quality growth decile of the Russell 1000 relative to the market average was recently two standard deviations higher than its baseline. Likewise the earnings stability spread was 1.5 standard deviations more expensive. Here is where you find the serious crowding. In a market pullback overbought stocks pose the biggest risk. Investors should neither think that high quality growth stocks are the answer to market uncertainty nor should they blindly rotate out of growth into value. Yes value stocks have gotten increasingly cheap and we think that investors have opportunities to select bargains. Yet ultimately the best time to broadly buy value stocks is after a bona fide recession. True leadership change in the market never happens until after a bear market and all indicators suggest that we just aren t there yet. Risk Considerations There is no assurance that a Portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market values of securities owned by the Portfolio will decline and may therefore be less than what you paid for them. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this Portfolio. Please be aware that this Portfolio may be subject to certain additional risks. In general equities securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Stocks of small and medium capitalization companies entail special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic market and liquidity risks. Illiquid securities may be more difficult to sell and value than publicly traded securities liquidity risk . Non diversified portfolios often invest in a more limited number of issuers. As such changes in the financial condition or market value of a single issuer may cause greater volatility. 