 Asset owners pension funds endowments foundations and other large institutional investors are embracing sustainable investing and viewing environmental social and governance ESG factors as a way to proactively manage risk and returns. Of the $22.8 trillion invested sustainably or $1 in every $4 under professional management institutional investors own nearly 75%.1 The momentum for sustainable investing is high and asset owners are speaking louder than ever. In Japan the Government Pension Investment Fund the world s largest pension with $1.3 trillion under management announced last year that it would increase the ESG allocation of its equity holdings from 3% to 10%.2 Meanwhile New York City announced in January 2018 that it would divest its $189 billion public pension fund from fossil fuels in the next five years.3 Beyond pensions other asset owners including foundations are rising to the occasion as well. In April 2017 the Ford Foundation announced a commitment of $1 billion of its endowment to mission related investments.4 A recent survey from the Morgan Stanley Institute for Sustainable Investing and Morgan Stanley Investment Management finds continued growth and ample opportunity ahead. The survey which gathered insights from 118 global asset owners 60% of which had assets over $10 billion finds that 84% are pursuing or actively considering pursuing ESG integration in their investment process. Of those 60% began doing so in the last four years and 37% within the last two. .amcharts chart div a display none important Most Asset Owners Are Integrating ESG Criteria Into Investment ProcessDoes your organization seek to integrate sustainable investing or ESG criteria into the investment process including selection of third party investment managers .amcharts chart div a display none important Most Asset Owners Have Been Integrating ESG for Less Than 4 YearsHow long has sustainable investing or ESG criteria been integrated into your investment process Investors have become more sophisticated viewing sustainability as a driver of returns and risk management. They are also adopting multiple approaches across their investments with 78% rating risk management as an important factor driving sustainable investing at their organizations and 77% saying that return potential was important. .amcharts chart div a display none important Risk Management and Return Potential Are Leading DriversHow important are each of the following factors in driving sustainable investing adoption at your organization .amcharts chart div a display none important Multiple Approaches to Sustainable InvestingWhich of the following approaches to sustainable investing does your organization currently employ The UN s Sustainable Development Goals are gaining traction as an organizing framework with 78% of asset owners saying that they seek to align their investments with them or considering doing so. .amcharts chart div a display none important UN s Sustainable Development Goals Gain TractionDoes your organization seek to address or align with any of the UN Sustainable Development Goals as part of its investment strategy There s plenty of room for growth 77% of respondents agreed that they have a responsibility to address sustainability through their investments. .amcharts chart div a display none important Asset Owners Feel They Have a Responsibility to Address SustainabilityTo what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statement Asset owners have a responsibility to address global sustainability issues through their investments But proof of market rate financial performance remains the top challenge 24% . Lack of tools and data is also a barrier. Only 42% feel they have adequate tools to assess sustainable investments. .amcharts chart div a display none important Lack of Tools to Assess Sustainable InvestmentsDoes your organization have adequate tools to assess the alignment of its investments with its sustainable investing goals Read more Sustainability Insights from Morgan Stanley Investment Management. 