 The July European Central Bank ECB monetary policy meeting pretty much confirmed that policy is likely to be eased in September. The interim period will be used to build a consensus in the Governing Council around what exactly the policy response should be. Guided by some pretty explicit language in the statement our expectation is for the ECB to announce a package of easing measures most likely including rate cuts changes to its forward guidance renewed quantitative easing QE and mitigating measures to offset some of the cost of more negative interest rates on the banking sector. While the main measures may be easy to anticipate the unexpected details may matter more the ECB under Draghi has excelled at surprising the market with its dovishness by coming up with policy measures that few anticipated we expect the same at his swan song. This ECB meeting was important because it confirmed a shift in monetary policy bias which President Mario Draghi signalled at Sintra in mid June. In that speech he stated that In the absence of improvement additional stimulus will be required a clear indication that the ECB was far closer to easing monetary policy than previously thought. Prior to that it stood ready to act only if things got worse now he was saying things needed to get better for the ECB NOT to act. It was not definite following that speech if ECB policy had changed as several Governing Council members gave speeches or interviews which suggested easing would only happen if things got worse. However the July ECB meeting confirmed that unless things got suddenly better an agreement to ease policy was reached even if there was no agreement yet on what exactly those easing measures should be. It seems that once again Mario Draghi has moved ahead of the rest of the Governing Council and then pulled it in line with his thinking. So what caused the ECB to change its position and what policy options are likely The reason for the change is not immediately obvious because the recent Eurozone macroeconomic environment while not exactly flourishing has not been struggling too badly. The manufacturing sector is weak but the labour market and construction sectors remain strong. We think the change comes from three factors first Eurozone core inflation has failed to pick up despite the fact that the labour market has tightened and wage growth has been robust for some time now second both survey and market based measures of medium term inflation expectations i.e. inflation breakevens have fallen this year casting doubt about whether the ECB can achieve its inflation mandate third the ECB continues to worry about international geopolitical and trade risks which pose hard to predict downside threats to the Eurozone economy. As Draghi stated explicitly the ECB is currently failing on its inflation mandate and is increasingly not expected to achieve it any time soon all while the economy is not getting better. The Governing Council does not like what it sees. So the ECB needs to act not only because it is failing to meet its inflation mandate and believing risks are skewed to the downside but also because it is concerned about losing credibility as a central bank that specifically targets inflation. This is slightly different to the situation in which the U.S. Federal Reserve Fed finds itself where moderate inflation gives it leeway to ease if it wants. For the ECB weak inflation is forcing it to act. In terms of policy response we think the ECB is likely to announce a package of easing measures in September. This is something it has favoured doing in the past as a collection of complimentary policy initiatives is more effective than a piecemeal approach. It is debateable whether the ECB has a big policy bazooka left so getting the most out of the tools it does have is important and getting maximum bang for the buck involves combining them. Given the details given in July s announcement the package we envision is A 20 basis point cut in the Deposit rate rate cuts were not mentioned in July s release but the ECB hasn t pushed back on the market pricing in of cuts and the mention of mitigating measures see below suggests they are likely. In our mind cutting by less than 20 basis points achieves little and cutting more may be counterproductive due to the negative impact on the banking sector. Rate cuts are the conventional tool for central banks to stimulate the economy and Draghi has highlighted their effectiveness in the Eurozone given their impact on the currency i.e. rate cuts should provide additional stimulus and inflationary pressure if they cause the euro to depreciate. Changes to forward guidance the guidance the ECB provides on when it plans to change interest rates and other policy settings in the future is a key tool as it enables it to influence interest rates across the yield curve. As in the past it may be combined with QE and other measures e.g. the ECB will not raise interest rates until after it has finished new QE purchases . A resumption of the QE programme July s statement referred to options for the size and composition of potential new asset purchases. So we do not only expect a resumption of quantitative easing but changes to the parameters of the previous programme as well. An increase in individual issuer limits to 40% or 50% will be necessary to make a new programme credibly large but we will also be keeping an eye out for any innovative additions to purchases like senior bank debt. Mitigating measures to offset the rate cuts it is estimated that the negative interest rates banks currently earn on their ECB deposits actually costs them EUR 8 billion per year although the cost falls mainly on northern European banks rather than being evenly spread across the system as a whole. A tiering system whereby a higher rate is paid on some initial portion of a bank s excess reserves would alleviate some of the cost although the programme would need to be carefully designed not to raise money market interest rates which would reduce the effect of cutting rates. Something else the ECB under Draghi has excelled at developing innovative policy initiatives. His reputation for surprising the market primarily comes from designing policy measures investors didn t anticipate rather than doing more of what they were expecting. We re not quite sure what the ECB might pull out of its bag of tricks this time but we wouldn t be surprised to see something different from just vanilla rate cuts more QE and forward guidance. If we re correct about our expectations what do we think the impact on fixed income markets is likely to be The market has already priced in more than 20 basis points of rate cuts by the end of 2020 so we think the fall in the yield of German government bunds and other high quality government issuers is limited even if they are once again supported by renewed ECB buying. However we expect euro sovereign spreads to tighten as yieldhungry investors are forced into holding lower rated paper. Sovereign spreads have already tightened significantly this year for example 10 year Spanish bonos now only yield 70 basis points more than German bunds down from nearly 130 basis points in early January. However the fiscal fundamentals of most of these countries have also been improving justifying tighter spreads. We think there is more to go. RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that a Portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market values of securities owned by the Portfolio will decline and may therefore be less than what you paid for them. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this Portfolio. Please be aware that this Portfolio may be subject to certain additional risks. Fixed income securities are subject to the ability of an issuer to make timely principal and interest payments credit risk changes in interest rates interest rate risk the creditworthiness of the issuer and general market liquidity market risk . In the current rising interest rate environment bond prices may fall and may result in periods of volatility and increased portfolio redemptions. Longer term securities may be more sensitive to interest rate changes. In a declining interest rate environment the Portfolio may generate less income. Mortgage and asset backed securities are sensitive to early prepayment risk and a higher risk of default and may be hard to value and difficult to sell liquidity risk . They are also subject to credit market and interest rate risks. Certain U.S. government securities purchased by the Strategy such as those issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are not backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. It is possible that these issuers will not have the funds to meet their payment obligations in the future. High yield securities junk bonds are lower rated securities that may have a higher degree of credit and liquidity risk. Public bank loans are subject to liquidity risk and the credit risks of lower rated securities. Foreign securities are subject to currency political economic and market risks. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed countries. Sovereign debt securities are subject to default risk. Derivative instruments may disproportionately increase losses and have a significant impact on performance. They also may be subject to counterparty liquidity valuation correlation and market risks. Restricted and illiquid securities may be more difficult to sell and value than publicly traded securities liquidity risk . 