 A holistic approach to sustainability with respect to disruptive change financial strength environmental and social externalities and governance ESG helps us identify investment opportunities. ESG is a Component of Quality We believe that ESG factors are integral to assessing the quality of a company and thus are a vital part of our investment process. When we formulate our investment thesis on the quality of a company we ask three key questions1 to determine the sustainability of competitive advantage and how it can be monetized through growth Is the company a disruptor or is it insulated from disruptive change Does the company demonstrate financial strength with high returns on invested capital high margins strong cash conversion low capital intensity and low leverage Are there environmental or social externalities not borne by the company or governance and accounting risks that may alter the investment thesis ESG FACTORS MAY MATERIALLY IMPACT INVESTMENT RISK AND REWARD. Companies are increasingly confronted with environmental issues social factors and relationships with regulators and the communities in which they operate. In this context managing ESG factors is simply part of sustaining competitive advantage in today s economy. ESG EXTERNALITIES MAY NOT BE NOT FULLY PRICED INTO THE VALUE OF COMPANIES. When companies externalize the price of environmental and social issues upon the communities in which they operate they are by definition over monetized earning excess profits because the costs of externalities are not borne by the company. Investors risk paying the price when such excess is corrected and environmental and social costs are internalized to the company income statement. ESG RISK EVENTS HAVE MATERIALLY DETRACTED FROM PERFORMANCE. In recent years shareholders have suffered substantial losses following ESG risk events while there is no silver bullet to avoid such catastrophes we believe that incorporating ESG analysis can mitigate these risks. Our Quality Assessment of Companies Has Always Incorporated Governance Long Term Ownership Mindset We seek to own big ideas that win over time. Over extended time horizons we believe that ESG risks are more likely to materialize and externalities are more likely to be priced into the value of securities. Therefore we continue to innovate and evolve our process and believe that integrating ESG within our investment analysis improves the investment risk and reward profile of client portfolios. 