 Engagement is our edge We believe active managers running concentrated portfolios are best positioned to identify potentially material ESG risks as well as opportunities. Investor led engagement helps our team build a more comprehensive picture of a company s ESG profile. We are pleased to announce that MSIM was ranked A1 for the Listed Equity modules in its UN PRI Annual Assessment and A on the Engagement sub score as of September 2019. For 2019 all MSIM UN PRI Annual Assessment scores meet or exceed the peer median. In the first half of 2019 a lot of our engagement was focused on the issue of plastic waste. Our report contains a summary of our engagements and our conclusions on the impact on consumer staples companies of the transition to a circular plastic economy. 1 To be ranked A a company must receive a combined score between 75 95 100 in the core and additional assessed indicators. To be ranked A a company must score 95 100. RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that a portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market value of securities owned by the portfolio will decline. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this strategy. Please be aware that this strategy may be subject to certain additional risks. Changes in the worldwide economy consumer spending competition demographics and consumer preferences government regulation and economic conditions may adversely affect global franchise companies and may negatively impact the strategy to a greater extent than if the strategy s assets were invested in a wider variety of companies. In general equity securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic and market risks. Stocks of small capitalization companies carry special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed markets. Non diversified portfolios often invest in a more limited number of issuers. As such changes in the financial condition or market value of a single issuer may cause greater volatility. 