 With the world economy emerging from a growth scare in the fourth quarter of 2018 we were confident that the U.S. and global economies were steadily recovering and not headed towards a recession. Our expectation was that the recovery may take a few more quarters to take hold based on a combination of cyclical and structural trends. That all changed on the 10 May when an increase in tariffs on Chinese imports announced by President Trump took effect reviving the game of tariffs between China and the U.S. that has been a drag on the global economy. This did not come as a surprise to us as the U.S. China trade tension is one of the key binary risks we highlighted in our previous outlook. Despite the tensions we believe the medium term growth story remains intact but given recent heightening of trade tensions this may be delayed. In fact these trade tensions may increase the likelihood of further fiscal stimulus in China and the U.S. although this may be accompanied by volatility. Treading carefully around potential near term volatility investors should be keeping an eye on the midgame. We are navigating this near term disruption by reducing risk in our portfolios on a short term basis with the aim of eventually moving back into equities. Despite tensions global trade might have found a floor The China U.S. trade tensions have hindered world trade resulting in the most significant decline in volumes since the 2008 crisis Display 1 and impacting export reliant economies. World trade flows pulled back in February 2019 following a January improvement in a move that was telegraphed by Q1 softness in new export order PMI Purchasing Managers Index data. Display 1 Trade flows damaged by tariffs Source CPB Bloomberg. Data as at 10 May 2019. Prior to recent tensions new export data had indicated a significant rebound in Chinese orders and a potential bottom for orders in Europe Display 2 . The trade battles of early May have the potential to again destabilise this in the short run but we still expect trade flows to improve in the medium term. China is important to the recovery A central piece to the turnaround has been the stimulus in China. While the current stimulus is only about 1.5% of GDP on the fiscal side a steep drop from nearly 10% in 2008 it is far more targeted.1 The last three Chinese stimulus cycles drove money into the property markets which is a quick way to boost consumption. Cities like Beijing Shanghai and Shenzhen experienced property price increases as high as 30 40% per annum2. This created a bubble as people sought to direct more funds into the easy money property markets. Display 2 China s new export orders rebound and the eurozone may have found a floor Source Nikkei Markit Datastream. Data as at 10 May 2019. Today s stimulus has been devised to prevent the bubble from bursting It includes policies aimed at maintaining the relative tightening on the property side while directing the fiscal stimulus to the private sector and the consumer. Given the nature of the new stimulus we expect it to operate more slowly than in the past but ultimately be more sustainable. The Chinese consumer is far more indebted today than in the past. Over the last 10 years debt levels have nearly doubled Display 3 . Although still manageable compared to other countries debts the speed with which this level has risen is a concern. Also concerning is the younger generation s struggle to save The cost of living is rising and mortgage rates are running at about 5% to 6% compared to 2% in the UK. It will not be easy for consumers to go on a spending spree. While aware of the longer term risks of growing household debt Chinese policymakers do not want their economy to slow any further. With tariff tensions rising again they have already made some tentative moves to further increase the stimulus but they seem to be keeping further increases in property prices as a last resort. Display 3 Owing more Chinese consumer debt is rising Source Bloomberg National Bureau of Statistics of China. Data as at 10 May 2019. The value of U.S. public infrastructure. . . Both the President and Congressional Democrats have supported fiscal stimulus through infrastructure programmes with a $2 trillion target discussed last November. Nevertheless during a recent meeting with the Democratic leadership Trump made his support for infrastructure contingent on Congressional investigations into his administration and business stopping. While this is a setback it appears that backchannels for progress on legislative initiatives still remain open for example the disaster aid bill just passed by the Senate and is still supported by Trump . We still believe that an infrastructure spending programme remains highly popular with the public and would be likely to prevent a recession in 2020. These politically powerful drivers suggest that this initiative may be reconsidered soon. Senate Republican support would be contingent on how this initiative was funded and a gasoline tax which has not been increased since the Clinton administration remains a good possibility even though in the end a major infrastructure bill is likely to be front loaded and paid for initially with debt. . . . and the case for an uptick in private investment Business fixed investment is typically the most cyclical element in GDP with a disproportionate impact on the business cycle. Display 4 tracks how core CapEx growth recovered from the lows of 2015 and 2016 peaked in December 2017 and then stabilised somewhat before plunging in 2018. This sharp drop was likely in large part due to the trade war. Uncertainties about global supply chains forced businesses to postpone needed investment. The slight March 2019 rebound represents the biggest improvement in corporate investment in eight months. Display 4 U.S. business equipment orders are stable to improving Source U.S. Census Bureau Bloomberg. Data as at 10 May 2019. The recent revival in tensions certainly has the potential to postpone CapEx again but there are several trends constructive for business fixed investment to grow in the medium term. Most importantly there is a significant pent up demand with existing capital equipment very obsolete and technological change moving at a rapid pace businesses desperately need to upgrade their capital stock. Meanwhile climate change related disruptions will tend to accelerate the rate of capital investment as the economy transitions towards things like electric vehicles and solar energy. And any fiscal stimulus programme based on infrastructure spending would also boost capital expenditures CapEx . Stimulus prospects in Europe As populist movements continue to gather support as demonstrated in the recent EU Parliamentary elections the pressure on European governments to increase spending grows. A stimulus agenda appears to be gaining with it. The Eurozone s four largest economies now appearing likely to implement expansionary fiscal measures in 2019. This expectation is supported by the latest data from the European Commission which anticipate some degree of stimulus from Germany France Italy and Spain Display 5 . Display 5 For Eurozone s four largest economies stimulus looks likely Source European Commission MSIM. Data from European Economic Forecast Spring 2019 released on 7 May 2019. Forecasts estimates are based on current market conditions subject to change and may not necessarily come to pass. The outlook for automobiles The traditional bounce in auto production may not be as pronounced as during previous cycles. In fact the disruptive transition from internal combustion engine to electrical vehicles may weaken the effect of industry growth in the short term. Many auto manufacturers are planning to shift to electric vehicles a change that could be quite constructive for longer term capital investment. Employment though could suffer because the production of electric vehicles requires far less labour. Automakers may close down facilities before they open new ones so to the extent this occurs it could take time to see the potential boost to net investment. We expect a recovery but not in the traditional V shape While stimulus from China helped create a V shaped recovery in 2015 2016 their current stimulus is both smaller and designed to benefit just China with less constructive spillover to the rest of the world. Global inventories are also generally too high likely due to stockpiling in anticipation of Brexit disruptions and the trade war Display 6 . This excessive inventory cycle will have to be worked off. For example the semiconductor downturn has not bottomed with high chip inventory levels still weakening spending. Display 6 UK manufacturing inventories show evidence of stockpiling Source Markit CIPS Bloomberg. Data as at 10 May 2019. Nevertheless what is usually missing from a sustainable recovery is growth in CapEx. Today we see strong potential for CapEx growth though it may be postponed by trade tensions. Moreover we see several self reinforcing countercyclical elements that may help even in the face of the trade war. The more intense the tariff tensions become the more likely it becomes that the Chinese will increase their stimulus and the U.S. will pass a significant infrastructure plan. And companies are more prepared now for shifted supply chains than they were when the trade war was initiated. Ignore mostly the trade noise The medium term outlook is positive. While trade issues do suggest near term caution fiscal stimulus in China potential U.S. infrastructure spending and the pent up demand for capital expenditure are all powerful positives that are ready to help the markets as soon as the trade dispute is resolved. A resolution would also help with European fixed investment which is closely tied to trade. Eurozone equity valuations look attractive based on the average yield premium versus bonds Display 7 . Also the European Central Bank ECB is turning much friendlier towards the banking system than it was in the past. We also expect more consolidation in European banks. One area where we are cautious is the U.S. technology sector where valuations again appear to be overshooting earnings. On bonds our longer term outlook is positive for the economy so negative for bonds. But tariff tensions can make bonds on a temporary basis look more attractive. Display 7 Eurozone equity dividends are offering a healthy premium over bond yields Source IBES. Data as at 10 May 2019. Past performance is no guarantee of future results. The index performance is provided for illustrative purposes only and is not meant to depict the performance of a specific investment. See disclosure section for index definitions. The growth story remains intact As highlighted in one of our recent commentaries the revival of U.S. China trade tensions is one of the binary risks that could complicate our generally positive view on a global recovery. And while these unpredictable lightning strikes emanating from the White House have a disruptive near term impact we nonetheless remain positive on the medium term growth story the midgame. Risk Considerations There is no assurance that the strategy will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market values of securities owned by the portfolio will decline and that the value of portfolio shares may therefore be less than what you paid for them. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this portfolio. Please be aware that this strategy may be subject to certain additional risks. There is the risk that the Adviser s asset allocation methodology and assumptions regarding the Underlying Portfolios may be incorrect in light of actual market conditions and the portfolio may not achieve its investment objective. Share prices also tend to be volatile and there is a significant possibility of loss. The portfolio s investments in commodity linked notes involve substantial risks including risk of loss of a significant portion of their principal value. In addition to commodity risk they may be subject to additional special risks such as risk of loss of interest and principal lack of secondary market and risk of greater volatility that do not affect traditional equity and debt securities. Currency fluctuations could erase investment gains or add to investment losses. Fixed income securities are subject to the ability of an issuer to make timely principal and interest payments credit risk changes in interest rates interest rate risk the creditworthiness of the issuer and general market liquidity market risk . In a rising interest rate environment bond prices may fall. In general equities securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic and market risks. Stocks of small capitalisation companies carry special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed markets. Exchange traded funds ETFs shares have many of the same risks as direct investments in common stocks or bonds and their market value will fluctuate as the value of the underlying index does. By investing in exchange traded funds ETFs and other Investment Funds the portfolio absorbs both its own expenses and those of the ETFs and Investment Funds it invests in. Supply and demand for ETFs and Investment Funds may not be correlated to that of the underlying securities. Derivative instruments can be illiquid may disproportionately increase losses and may have a potentially large negative impact on the portfolio s performance. The use of leverage may increase volatility in the Portfolio. Diversification does not protect you against a loss in a particular market however it allows you to spread that risk across various asset classes. 