 Global Sustain is a high quality low carbon portfolio using bottom up fundamental analysis and active engagement with company management when appropriate to identify material environmental social and governance risks to and opportunities for the sustainability of long term company returns. THE PORTFOLIO 25 50 of the highest quality compounders in the world at reasonable valuations A carbon light portfolio that avoids low return polluting sectors such as materials energy and gas and electric utilities Excludes contentious industries such as tobacco alcohol and controversial weapons Exposure to companies leading the way in consumer and staff engagement through a focus on key social and environmental issues Invests in companies demonstrating capital discipline driven by capable management and a sound governance structure WE BELIEVE The best way to compound shareholder wealth is by owning very high quality companies with sustainable and high returns over the long term sustainable compounders Integrating ESG is essential for successful long term compounding Investing in sustainable compounders requires focusing on minimising the risk of permanent loss of capital rather than chasing upside Material social and environmental risks to the sustainability of long term returns and therefore compounding are more important than ever given political and technological change Leading the way on social and environmental issues can be a positive force for corporate success driving consumer employee and stakeholder engagement The higher the quality of a business the more important governance is as management has more degrees of freedom to mismanage the business Investing with a conscience doesn t have to mean sacrificing the potential for attractive long term returns WE BRING A history of more than two decades of successful investment in sustainably high return compounders A disciplined process focusing on the risks and opportunities facing currently successful businesses The scrutiny of material environmental and social risks and opportunities fully integrated into the investment process A key focus on good governance and a successful record of engagement with companies RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that a portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market value of securities owned by the portfolio will decline. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this strategy. Please be aware that this strategy may be subject to certain additional risks. Changes in the worldwide economy consumer spending competition demographics and consumer preferences government regulation and economic conditions may adversely affect global franchise companies and may negatively impact the strategy to a greater extent than if the strategy s assets were invested in a wider variety of companies. In general equity securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic and market risks. Stocks of small capitalization companies carry special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed markets. Non diversified portfolios often invest in a more limited number of issuers. As such changes in the financial condition or market value of a single issuer may cause greater volatility. Option writing strategy. Writing call options involves the risk that the Portfolio may be required to sell the underlying security or instrument or settle in cash an amount of equal value at a disadvantageous price or below the market price of such underlying security or instrument at the time the option is exercised. As the writer of a call option the Portfolio forgoes during the option s life the opportunity to profit from increases in the market value of the underlying security or instrument covering the option above the sum of the premium and the exercise price but retains the risk of loss should the price of the underlying security or instrument decline. Additionally the Portfolio s call option writing strategy may not fully protect it against declines in the value of the market. There are special risks associated with uncovered option writing which expose the Portfolio to potentially significant loss. 