 Explaining Q1 Why markets regained ground from 4Q18 weakness Markets OVER estimated risks U.S. China Brexit . Thus the absence of BAD news is GOOD news. Markets UNDER appreciated global growth forming a bumpy base. We expect the second half of 2019 to be stronger. Soft data is improving China U.S. Europe lagging though some signs of hope per economic research firms like Ifo and ZEW . Hard data usually lags soft data. The improving soft data is being priced into the market now but perhaps not fully yet. Central banks became less hawkish easier as they seemingly incorporated global factors into their policy response functions especially the U.S. Federal Reserve Fed . Causality Lower rates have catalyzed the risk appetite of investors. Real yields are at very stimulative levels. U.S. 10 year real yields have collapsed to 50 basis points which has been the average following the European Central Bank s ECB s 2013 Outright Monetary Transaction OMT program. U.S. yields fell when 2019 economic growth was projected to remain above potential growth at 1.8%. The U.S. Treasury yield curve Reading the U.S. T leaves. The yield curve is telling us the Fed wants to extend the economic cycle not end it Past yield curve inversions were typically brought about by Fed policy designed to end an overheating economic cycle. This is not the case today. What s different is the Fed is adding accommodation not tightening. Lower long term yields help reduce the risk of excessive corporate leverage by allowing companies more time to de lever and refinance longer term debt at a lower yield reducing the cost of interest coverage. Q2 and Ahead Is there anything left for the market to give Yes but policy guidance needs to remain accommodative U.S. 10 year real yields of less than 80 basis points for example . A U.S. China trade deal may provide a modest boost but it seems mostly priced in already. Brexit is still a risk. Obvious exposures have been hedged but unintended consequences are a real risk. The U.S. Dollar has been sticky and it needs to weaken even marginally as a precondition for the next phase of the market rally. Global growth needs to converge i.e. rebound in the 2H19. Asset price performance Emerging markets EM are likely to benefit the most stability of global growth commodity price increases weaker dollar . We expect carry spread assets to perform well Securitized housing still strong fundamentals and technicals. Investment grade opportunities from companies de levering and moving up in credit rating. High yield still a good carry story with 6.50% yield and benefits from a low default risk environment. If central bank policy is successful economies should reflate. Sovereign bond yields would find a bottom. Inflation risk premia would rise and select developed market curves would re steepen in the 2H19. Potential Opportunities EM local debt Low inflation higher yielding reform story. We currently see opportunities in South Africa moderate inflation reprieve in credit quality ratings but it does have political risks. Mexico high yields central bank may turn dovish in line with the Fed. Also has political risk. Brazil structural reform story pensions . Also has political risk. Indonesia central bank looking to cut interest rates. U.S. high yield We currently see opportunities in Diversified manufacturing cyclical. Building materials cyclical. Transports consolidation story domestic U.S. focus friendly energy prices and cyclical. Food beverage defensive. Investment Grade We currently see opportunities in Banking financials higher yield higher regulations and higher credit quality. Telecom media de levering trends. RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that a Portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market values of securities owned by the Portfolio will decline and may therefore be less than what you paid for them. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this Portfolio. Please be aware that this Portfolio may be subject to certain additional risks. Fixed income securities are subject to the ability of an issuer to make timely principal and interest payments credit risk changes in interest rates interest rate risk the creditworthiness of the issuer and general market liquidity market risk . In the current rising interest rate environment bond prices may fall and may result in periods of volatility and increased portfolio redemptions. Longer term securities may be more sensitive to interest rate changes. In a declining interest rate environment the Portfolio may generate less income. Mortgage and asset backed securities are sensitive to early prepayment risk and a higher risk of default and may be hard to value and difficult to sell liquidity risk . They are also subject to credit market and interest rate risks. Certain U.S. government securities purchased by the Strategy such as those issued by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are not backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. It is possible that these issuers will not have the funds to meet their payment obligations in the future. High yield securities junk bonds are lower rated securities that may have a higher degree of credit and liquidity risk. Public bank loans are subject to liquidity risk and the credit risks of lower rated securities. Foreign securities are subject to currency political economic and market risks. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed countries. Sovereign debt securities are subject to default risk. Derivative instruments may disproportionately increase losses and have a significant impact on performance. They also may be subject to counterparty liquidity valuation correlation and market risks. Restricted and illiquid securities may be more difficult to sell and value than publicly traded securities liquidity risk . 