 In this slow grinding economic cycle markets have experienced a series of recession scares. Yet the Applied Equity Advisor team is not in the recession camp. Andrew Slimmon maintains that the U.S. stock market will break out during the fourth quarter of 2019 with the S P 500 ending the year well north of 3 000. This is despite the fact that the current market is range bound and a level of fear is palpable. As was the case in Q1 2009 fund flows are currently negative sentiment figures are dour and the valuation spread between the perceived safe and cyclical stocks is hugely distorted. Sentiment is consistent with a bear market low not a bull market peak. But in 2009 the market exhibited a significant recovery despite the negativity and Slimmon expects similarly at the end of 2019. However the inverted yield curve should not be ignored an indication of potential problems for the economy in 2021. RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that a portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market values of securities owned by the portfolio will decline and may therefore be less than what you paid for them. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this portfolio. Please be aware that this portfolio may be subject to certain additional risks. In general equities securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Stocks of small and medium capitalization companies entail special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic market and liquidity risks. Illiquid securities may be more difficult to sell and value than publicly traded securities liquidity risk . Non diversified portfolios often invest in a more limited number of issuers. As such changes in the financial condition or market value of a single issuer may cause greater volatility. 