 Engagement is our edge We believe active managers running concentrated portfolios are best positioned to identify potentially material environmental social and governance ESG risks as well as opportunities and to engage directly with companies as they arise. Direct and focused engagement helps our team build a more comprehensive picture of a company s ESG profile than solely relying on third party scores. Included in the report are some real life examples of our ESG engagement and ESG influenced portfolio activity from the second half of 2018. We also show how they are linked to the UN Sustainable Development Goals SDGs below. Although we do not base our investment decisions on SDGs they are a useful tool for helping investors track corporate sustainability progress.1 UN Sustainable Development Goals 1 The content of this publication has not been approved by the United Nations and does not reflect the views of the United Nations or its officials or Member States. For additional information please see the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals web site at https www.un.org sustainabledevelopment sustainable development goals. RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that a portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market value of securities owned by the portfolio will decline. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this strategy. Please be aware that this strategy may be subject to certain additional risks. Changes in the worldwide economy consumer spending competition demographics and consumer preferences government regulation and economic conditions may adversely affect global franchise companies and may negatively impact the strategy to a greater extent than if the strategy s assets were invested in a wider variety of companies. In general equity securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic and market risks. Stocks of small capitalization companies carry special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed markets. Non diversified portfolios often invest in a more limited number of issuers. As such changes in the financial condition or market value of a single issuer may cause greater volatility. 