 SAN JOSE CA June 11 2018 Cohesity the leader of hyperconverged secondary storage today announced it raised $250 million in an oversubscribed Series D funding round led by the SoftBank Vision Fund with strong participation from strategic investors Cisco Investments Hewlett Packard Enterprise HPE and Morgan Stanley Expansion Capital along with early investor Sequoia Capital and others. The investment is a testament to Cohesity s leadership in transforming data center and cloud operations with web scale simplicity for secondary data. This round brings total equity raised to $410 million outpacing all other Series D enterprise software investments in the United States over the last 18 months. This is only the second time SoftBank Investment Advisers has invested in an enterprise software company. Cohesity is using the investment to power large scale global expansion by attacking a problem that enterprises currently spend an estimated $60 billion each year to address using separate point solutions. Cohesity pioneered hyperconverged secondary storage as a first stepping stone on the path to a much larger transformation of enterprise infrastructure spanning public and private clouds said Deep Nishar senior managing partner SoftBank Investment Advisers. We believe that Cohesity s web scale Google like approach cloud native architecture and incredible simplicity is changing the business of IT in a fundamental way. My vision has always been to provide enterprises with cloud like simplicity for their many fragmented applications and data backup test and development analytics and more said Cohesity CEO and Founder Mohit Aron. Cohesity has built significant momentum and market share during the last 12 months and we are just getting started. We succeed because our customers are some of the world s brightest and most fanatical IT organizations and are an extension of our development efforts. Accelerated Enterprise Adoption Drives Company Momentum Accelerating enterprise adoption Over 200 new enterprise customers selected Cohesity in just the last two quarters including Air Bud Entertainment AutoNation BC Oil and Gas Commission Bungie Harris Teeter Hyatt Kelly Services LendingClub Piedmont Healthcare Schneider Electric the San Francisco Giants TCF Bank the U.S. Department of Energy the U.S. Air Force and WestLotto. Rapid revenue growth Cohesity s annual revenues surged 600 percent from 2016 to 2017. Outstanding customer satisfaction Cohesity was recognized as a 2018 Gartner Peer Insights Customer s Choice solution for enterprise data center backup and recovery. Award winning support Cohesity has earned the NorthFace Scoreboard Award for excellence in customer service the last two years in a row. By simplifying application and data management while dramatically improving efficiency Cohesity has delivered enormous value to customers. Cohesity DataPlatform addresses the fragmented and complex infrastructure that enterprises are currently attacking with massive resources that could be driving success in other parts of the business. We believe Cohesity s hyperconverged architecture promises to fundamentally change the secondary storage landscape. We are excited to help fuel the company s momentum in providing enterprise customers with seamless application and data movement across the cloud and corporate data center said Pete Chung managing principal and head of Morgan Stanley Expansion Capital. Cohesity represents that elusive combination of rapid growth meaningful scale and market momentum we look for as later stage investors. About Cohesity Cohesity makes your data work for you by consolidating secondary storage silos onto a hyperconverged web scale data platform that spans both private and public clouds. Enterprise customers begin by radically streamlining their backup and data protection then converge file and object services test dev instances and analytic functions to provide a global data store. Cohesity counts many Global 1000 companies and federal agencies among its rapidly growing customer base and was named to Forbes Next Billion Dollar Startups 2017 LinkedIn s Startups The 50 Industry Disruptors You Need to Know Now and CRN s 2017 Emerging Vendors in Storage lists. For more information visit www.cohesity.com. 