 Dazzling investment returns make good headlines as do spectacular investment crashes. But seldom do we read stories about funds that excel in controlling volatility while delivering strong competitive returns. Yet managing volatility is the key to surviving a sharp market downturn. Most investment managers designate a benchmark to evaluate returns. Far fewer designate a benchmark focused on volatility. We are one of the few who do. Our investment process begins with risk. Depending on client preferences we specify a target range of volatility e.g. 4 10% within which we aim to maintain the investor s volatility1. A link between volatility targeting and higher Sharpe ratios Studies show that volatility has been negatively correlated to equity returns. As such it may make sense to allocate to lower risk assets when volatility is high or rising and to riskier assets when volatility is low or falling2. In fact data supports that many managers who do so often deliver a favorable Sharpe ratio which measures the amount of return generated given the amount of risk taken.3 The advantage of multiple asset classes Our multi asset portfolios hold a mix of equities fixed income commodity linked notes and cash. This flexibility to diversify across asset classes is critical in seeking to control risk. In fact research shows that global equities start to move in lockstep in distressed markets.4 Equity only managers therefore have no recourse other than to reallocate between their equity holdings and cash viewed by some as merely rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic. A multi asset manager in contrast has multiple asset classes that can be rearranged to manage risk. A forward looking exercise Anticipating volatility is a hallmark of our investment approach. We continually survey macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions across the globe to identify potential sources of risk that could arise. Our goal is to adjust portfolio exposures before volatility strikes. We use the portfolio s equity allocation as the primary lever for adjusting its exposure to risk. When we expect some event such as an election political instability or change in monetary policy to cause a spike in market volatility we typically reduce exposure to equities. Conversely when market conditions normalize we restore the equity allocation to a more normal range. Case in point In the second half of 2018 there was an escalation in trade tensions that we anticipated could curtail global growth. By September we had also identified that divergence in equity market performance between the US vs the Rest of the World was approaching excessive levels. The US s outperformance was driven by a number of factors including the perception that the US is a safe haven and insulated from trade tensions. Expecting a market correction we decreased our equity allocation to reduce overall risk in our portfolios positioning towards more defensive assets. Final thought The psychological benefit of managing volatility For investors there is an emotional aspect of a strategy that aims to keep volatility within a specified range. Seeking to deliver a more consistent less volatile return stream can be of comfort to loss averse investors who might otherwise make rash decisions and sell prematurely. Strategies that aim to keep volatility within a pre set range could be of particular interest to high net worth investors. Given their aversion to volatility they might be willing to sacrifice some upside in order to help minimise sharp drawdowns. Keep in mind though there is no assurance that a strategy will attain the volatility target. RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that the Strategy will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market values of securities owned by the portfolio will decline and that the value of portfolio shares may therefore be less than what you paid for them. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this portfolio. Please be aware that this strategy may be subject to certain additional risks. There is the risk that the Adviser s asset allocation methodology and assumptions regarding the Underlying Portfolios may be incorrect in light of actual market conditions and the Portfolio may not achieve its investment objective. Share prices also tend to be volatile and there is a significant possibility of loss. The portfolio s investments in commodity linked notes involve substantial risks including risk of loss of a significant portion of their principal value. In addition to commodity risk they may be subject to additional special risks such as risk of loss of interest and principal lack of secondary market and risk of greater volatility that do not affect traditional equity and debt securities. Currency fluctuations could erase investment gains or add to investment losses. Fixed income securities are subject to the ability of an issuer to make timely principal and interest payments credit risk changes in interest rates interest rate risk the creditworthiness of the issuer and general market liquidity market risk . In a rising interest rate environment bond prices may fall. Equity and foreign securities are generally more volatile than fixed income securities and are subject to currency political economic and market risks. Equity values fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Stocks of small capitalization companies carry special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed markets. Exchange traded funds ETFs shares have many of the same risks as direct investments in common stocks or bonds and their market value will fluctuate as the value of the underlying index does. By investing in exchange traded funds ETFs and other Investment Funds the portfolio absorbs both its own expenses and those of the ETFs and Investment Funds it invests in. Supply and demand for ETFs and Investment Funds may not be correlated to that of the underlying securities. Derivative instruments can be illiquid may disproportionately increase losses and may have a potentially large negative impact on the portfolio s performance. A currency forward is a hedging tool that does not involve any upfront payment. The use of leverage may increase volatility in the Portfolio. Diversification does not protect you against a loss in a particular market however it allows you to spread that risk across various asset classes. 1 Volatility is a statistical measure of the dispersion of returns for a given security or market index. The GBaR team measures volatility on a forward looking basis using the manager s proprietary risk management system. 2 Lazard Dynamic Volatility Targeting September 2017. Based on correlation of VIX and S P 500 1991 2013. 3 Journal of Portfolio Management The Impact of Volatility Targeting Fall 2018. Based on balanced portfolio 60 equity 40 bond data from 1988 2018. 4 Vanguard Dynamic correlations The implications for portfolio construction April 2012. 