 As we have said before the good news about equities is that there are only two ways to lose money falling earnings or falling multiples. At the end of 2017 we were worried about the market s multiple. Following the de rating in 2018 our main anxiety shifted to earnings. In one sense this anxiety has proved relatively well placed with 2019 estimates for the MSCI World Index down 7% since the start of the year. But in a more important sense we were wrong to worry as markets have ignored the subsiding earnings and revived strongly. The MSCI World Index s multiple of 2019 earnings has surged from 13.4x to 16.5x boosted by the monetary generosity of the U.S. Federal Reserve and Mr. Draghi at the European Central Bank. The multiple is probably helped by the perennial assumption of future earnings growth with 2020 earnings expected to be 10% higher than 2019 arguably not a safe assumption. Our global portfolios have performed strongly in this environment up over 20% in 2019 so far and outperforming the index. Part of this has come from the resilient earnings holding up better than the market but there has also been a re rating. Our global portfolios are now trading on 20 21x the next 12 months earnings and on this measure are at a 28% 36% premium to the MSCI World Index versus a 19% 35% average premium since the Global Financial Crisis GFC or for those launched more recently their inception dates. Our portfolios are less prone to the curse of adjusted earnings or earnings before the bad stuff than the market as a whole Our priority is naturally absolute valuations but looking at the relative position it is our view that the portfolios should trade at a significant premium to the general market. The companies combination of recurring revenue and pricing power should protect revenues and margins and thus earnings in any downturn indeed our flagship global portfolio s earnings went up during the GFC. In addition our portfolios earnings are less prone to the curse of adjusted earnings or earnings before the bad stuff than the market as a whole be it ignoring paying employees in shares restructuring charges or write offs. In the U.S. alone $600 billion or 21% has disappeared between the adjusted number and the actual profit and loss statements over the last three years. The final point is that the high returns on capital of the companies in the portfolio drive a distinctly stronger free cash flow conversion than the market meaning that any premium is significantly lower in free cash flow terms. We would also argue that it is reasonable that the portfolios premiums are higher than usual at the moment as they are less affected than the general market by some of the current market worries be they the current drift down in earnings estimates the impact of falling interest rates on financials the possible effects of a worsening trade war or even an end to this very elongated economic cycle. If any of these scenarios bite the market s expectations for near double digit earnings growth in 2020 could prove distinctly optimistic while history suggests our portfolios earnings may well be rather more robust. Interestingly the relative re rating does not seem to have happened across the board but rather has been concentrated in the growthier part of the portfolios. We are not growth investors so by growthier we mean companies with medium term top line growth outlooks in the mid to high single digits as opposed to the 3% 5% top line growth in some of the steadier plays in the portfolios or the double digit growth sought after by growth investors. Consumer staples between 20% 40% of our global portfolios can be seen as a rough proxy for the steadier side of the portfolio. The sector as a whole is currently trading at a 21% premium to the MSCI World Index on the next 12 months earnings very much in line with the post GFC average of 22%. The consumer staples stocks in our portfolio are actually trading at a slight discount to the sector as a whole. MSCI World Consumer Staples PE Relative to MSCI World Index Source Morgan Stanley Investment Management and FactSet. The growth of recurring cloud based software revenues means the companies should be more robust in a downturn The software services sub sector within information technology which is around 30% 32% of our global portfolios can be seen as a proxy for the growthier side of the portfolio. This has re rated to a 58% premium to the MSCI World Index the level last seen before the GFC. While our portfolio holdings are at a slight discount to the sub sector as a whole they have re rated as well. Looking at our holdings we would argue that the re rating is understandable and that the current multiples are defensible. With the growth of the cloud the whole software industry has gone through a major transition. This shift suppressed multiples for a while due to perfectly reasonable doubts about companies ability to manage the transition aggravated by the pressure on margins as they built their new offerings. As they have started to emerge from the other side it has become clearer that they are well placed in the new environment while margins have started to recover as the cloud propositions approach scale most notably at an American multinational technology company we own. In addition there is the extra plus that the growth of cloud based SaaS Software as a Service revenues at the expense of traditional lumpy software sales means that the companies are more skewed to recurring revenue which should make them more robust in a downturn. The revenues of a German multinational software company we own went from 43% to 65% recurring between 2008 and 2018 with the percentage still rising as the strong cloud growth continues. MSCI World Software Services PE Relative to MSCI World Index Source Morgan Stanley Investment Management and FactSet. While we are generally comfortable with the absolute valuations of the growthier names that we own both in software services and beyond we have reacted to the re rating move. Since the start of 2018 we have made net additions to consumer staples and health care and reductions to the growthier software services and consumer discretionary sectors across our global portfolios. Looking across the sectors there have been around net sales of the growthier stocks those with estimated medium term sales growth above 6% with the cash being shifted to the steadier side of the portfolios. We remain confident in the resilience of our holdings earnings and their ability to compound As we mentioned at the start of the piece there are two ways to lose money in equities falling earnings and falling multiples. For the market as a whole we worry about both given that both are high earnings look vulnerable and the current combination of falling earnings with rising multiples is unlikely to be sustainable. Multiples also look fairly full for the portfolios in absolute terms at least and we clearly cannot preclude the possibility of a multiple driven drawdown. However we do remain confident in the resilience of our holdings earnings and their ability to compound. Over the medium term such compounding should mitigate any erosion of multiples. RISK CONSIDERATIONS There is no assurance that a portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market value of securities owned by the portfolio will decline. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this strategy. Please be aware that this strategy may be subject to certain additional risks. Changes in the worldwide economy consumer spending competition demographics and consumer preferences government regulation and economic conditions may adversely affect global franchise companies and may negatively impact the strategy to a greater extent than if the strategy s assets were invested in a wider variety of companies. In general equity securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic and market risks. Stocks of small capitalization companies carry special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. The risks of investing in emerging market countries are greater than risks associated with investments in foreign developed markets. Non diversified portfolios often invest in a more limited number of issuers. As such changes in the financial condition or market value of a single issuer may cause greater volatility. Option writing strategy. Writing call options involves the risk that the Portfolio may be required to sell the underlying security or instrument or settle in cash an amount of equal value at a disadvantageous price or below the market price of such underlying security or instrument at the time the option is exercised. As the writer of a call option the Portfolio forgoes during the option s life the opportunity to profit from increases in the market value of the underlying security or instrument covering the option above the sum of the premium and the exercise price but retains the risk of loss should the price of the underlying security or instrument decline. Additionally the Portfolio s call option writing strategy may not fully protect it against declines in the value of the market. There are special risks associated with uncovered option writing which expose the Portfolio to potentially significant loss. 