 Although many investors have become more tentative they could be overlooking two big factors for 2020 improving earnings and a possible election year surge for the economy. At first glance U.S. equities seem to be riding a bullish wave. The S P 500 is up more than 20% in 2019 and the steady stream of IPOs for high profile unicorns throughout the year suggested there was still appetite for growth story stocks. In actuality stocks are sitting under a pall of pessimism with the market little higher than it was in September 2018. What upside we ve seen has been fueled by corporations buying back their own stock and investors bidding up so called safety stocks. The consensus outlook estimates 11% earnings growth next year vs. flat growth for this year suggesting that the market has room to run. Andrew Slimmon Head of Applied Equity Advisors Team Investment Management Individual investors for their part largely haven t benefited. Between early December 2018 and mid August 2019 equity mutual funds and exchange traded funds saw $230 billion in net redemptions. As a percentage of total assets the 52 week outflow is the most we ve seen since the bottom of the market in 2002. Meanwhile investors have poured more than $476 billion into money market funds so far this year.1 This is a classic case of recency bias where investors decisions are based on what s behind them rather than what s ahead. Although this bearish sentiment has taken hold for many investors and has even been the topic of some debate here at Morgan Stanley my team and I believe that this outlook misses some significant positive factors for 2020 potential for improving earnings against relatively weak year over year comparisons and an incumbent president intent on boosting the economy as election day 2020 approaches. Here are some key points for investors to keep top of mind as we hit the final stretch of 2019 and into year ahead. The Power of an Election Year Historically the re election of an incumbent U.S. president hinges largely on the economy. Over the past century an incumbent was re elected in all cases where there wasn t a recession in the previous two years in only one case Calvin Coolidge did an incumbent win despite a recession. The Presidential cycle has historically had an impact on markets No recession 2 years before election vs. recession 2 years before election Recession President Year Reelection NO Obama 2012 YES NO Bush 43 2004 YES NO Clinton 1996 YES NO Reagan 1984 YES NO Nixon 1972 YES NO Johnson 1964 YES NO Eisenhower 1956 YES NO Truman 1948 YES NO FDR 1944 YES NO FDR 1940 YES NO FDR 1936 YES NO Wilson 1916 YES YES Bush 41 1992 NO YES Carter 1980 NO YES Ford 1976 NO YES Hoover 1932 NO YES Coolidge 1924 YES YES Taft 1912 NO Source Wall Street Journal Daily Shot May 23 2019. Yet voters have short term memories. The key isn t how the economy performs during this quarter but how it s faring this time next year. The current administration knows this which could be why the administration is proceeding deliberately with China trade negotiations. A lack of resolution on trade near term could also compel the Federal Reserve to continue cutting interest rates. A China trade deal alongside lower interest rates and the promise of an infrastructure bill could mean an economic shot in the arm for the U.S. in 2020. The upshot Our opinion is that President Trump will want the economy to be running hot heading into the polls next year. While that reduces the odds of an economic recession in 2020 it increases the risk of a pullback in 2021. Earnings Are Set to Reaccelerate As we ve noted throughout this year corporate earnings growth will likely be flat or contract in 2019 not because they are abysmal but because of the comparison with exceptional growth in 2018. The market has known this which is why stocks flirted with bear market territory late last year. Remember the market is a forward predictor. It rewards future positive rates of change and penalizes negative rates of change. As of early September the consensus outlook estimates 11% earnings growth next year vs. flat growth for this year suggesting that the market has room to run. I should note that my colleagues in the firm s Global Investment Committee have nuanced views on how an earnings recession could spiral into an economic recession in 2020 but in my view an earnings recession doesn t always mean an economic recession. Again this has been particularly true during an election year with an incumbent president. The upshot Relatively flat earnings growth in 2019 essentially lowers the bar for better comparables in 2020. .amcharts chart div a display none important We believe a 2019 earnings recession is a possibility followed by a reacceleration in earnings Quarter over quarter Real U.S. Earnings Growth Q1 2014 Present Source Bloomberg as of August 22 2019 Sideways Markets Don t Last Forever As mentioned earlier the market has effectively moved sideways since this time last year. What s more this isn t against a backdrop of investor exuberance. On the contrary investors have yanked money out of equity funds and are hoarding cash. By many measures bearish sentiment is the highest it s been since the height of the financial crisis. Historically this story doesn t end with a market crash but a rally. On seven occasions since 1900 the market has been flat for 350 or more trading days and in all cases the market was up six months later. The upshot Markets need to boom before they bust. The longer a market trades sideways the higher the likelihood that it breaks to the upside. .amcharts chart div a display none important After extended periods of consolidation the market has historically broken to the upside S P 500 March 9 2009 August 22 2019 Source FactSet Investors Should Take a Measured Approach Several factors suggest that the market will be higher a year from now than it is today but we aren t prescribing that investors wait for a pullback and jump back in feet first. As is the case in virtually every market environment we believe dollar cost averaging may make a great deal of sense today. Stylistically growth stocks still look expensive relative to value but they are not as expensive as they were at the peak in 2000. In fact if there is any bubble today it s in defensive stocks such as utilities and consumer staples. Investors are paying very high multiples for relative safety and nothing for cyclicality. The upshot Investors may want to avoid extremes both in terms of timing and allocation. Adapted from the recent webcast 2019 Equity Market Update Isn t the Equity Market a Forward Predictor Risk Considerations Dollar cost averaging does not ensure a profit or guarantee against loss in declining markets. For the strategy to be effective you must continue to purchase shares both in market ups and market downs. In addition if the market gains you may miss out on the potential gains. There is no assurance that a Portfolio will achieve its investment objective. Portfolios are subject to market risk which is the possibility that the market values of securities owned by the Portfolio will decline and may therefore be less than what you paid for them. Accordingly you can lose money investing in this Portfolio. Please be aware that this Portfolio may be subject to certain additional risks. In general equities securities values also fluctuate in response to activities specific to a company. Stocks of small and medium capitalization companies entail special risks such as limited product lines markets and financial resources and greater market volatility than securities of larger more established companies. Investments in foreign markets entail special risks such as currency political economic market and liquidity risks. Illiquid securities may be more difficult to sell and value than publicly traded securities liquidity risk . Non diversified portfolios often invest in a more limited number of issuers. As such changes in the financial condition or market value of a single issuer may cause greater volatility. Footnotes 1 Source Investment Company Institute 